I
THE LAST
TO SEE THEM ALIVE
The village of Holcomb stands on the high wheat plains of
western Kansas, a lonesome area that other Kansans call
“out there.” Some seventy miles east of the Colorado
border, the countryside, with its hard blue skies and desert-
clear air, has an atmosphere that is rather more Far West
than Middle West. The local accent is barbed with a prairie
twang, a ranch-hand nasalness, and the men, many of
them, wear narrow frontier trousers, Stetsons, and high-
heeled boots with pointed toes. The land is flat, and the
views are awesomely extensive; horses, herds of cattle, a
white cluster of grain elevators rising as gracefully as Greek
temples are visible long before a traveler reaches them.
Holcomb, too, can be seen from great distances. Not that
there is much to see—simply an aimless congregation of
buildings divided in the center by the main-line tracks of the
Santa Fe Railroad, a haphazard hamlet bounded on the
south by a brown stretch of the Arkansas (pronounced “Ar-
kan-sas”) River, on the north by a highway, Route 50, and
on the east and west by prairie lands and wheat fields.
After rain, or when snowfalls thaw, the streets, unnamed,
unshaded, unpaved, turn from the thickest dust into the
direst mud. At one end of the town stands a stark old
stucco structure, the roof of which supports an electric sign
—DANCE—but the dancing has ceased and the
advertisement has been dark for several years. Nearby is
another building with an irrelevant sign, this one in flaking
gold on a dirty window—HOLCOMB BANK. The bank closed in
1933, and its former counting rooms have been converted
into apartments. It is one of the town’s two “apartment
houses,” the second being a ramshackle mansion known,
because a good part of the local school’s faculty lives there,
as the Teacherage. But the majority of Holcomb’s homes
are one-story frame affairs, with front porches.
Down by the depot, the postmistress, a gaunt woman who
wears a rawhide jacket and denims and cowboy boots,
presides over a falling-apart post office. The depot itself,
with its peeling sulphur-colored paint, is equally melancholy;
the Chief, the Super-Chief, the El Capitan go by every day,
but these celebrated expresses never pause there. No
passenger trains do—only an occasional freight. Up on the
highway, there are two filling stations, one of which doubles
as a meagerly supplied grocery store, while the other does
extra duty as a café—Hartman’s Café, where Mrs.
Hartman, the proprietress, dispenses sandwiches, coffee,
soft drinks, and 3.2 beer. (Holcomb, like all the rest of
Kansas, is “dry.”)
And that, really, is all. Unless you include, as one must, the
Holcomb School, a good-looking establishment, which
reveals a circumstance that the appearance of the
community otherwise camouflages: that the parents who
send their children to this modern and ably staffed
“consolidated” school—the grades go from kindergarten
through senior high, and a fleet of buses transport the
students, of which there are usually around three hundred
and sixty, from as far as sixteen miles away—are, in
general, a prosperous people. Farm ranchers, most of
them, they are outdoor folk of very varied stock—German,
Irish, Norwegian, Mexican, Japanese. They raise cattle and
sheep, grow wheat, milo, grass seed, and sugar beets.
Farming is always a chancy business, but in western
Kansas its practitioners consider themselves “born
gamblers,” for they must contend with an extremely shallow
precipitation (the annual average is eighteen inches) and
anguishing irrigation problems. However, the last seven
years have been years of droughtless beneficence. The
farm ranchers in Finney County, of which Holcomb is a part,
have done well; money has been made not from farming
alone but also from the exploitation of plentiful natural-gas
resources, and its acquisition is reflected in the new school,
the comfortable interiors of the farmhouses, the steep and
swollen grain elevators.
Until one morning in mid-November of 1959, few
Americans—in fact, few Kansans—had ever heard of
Holcomb. Like the waters of the river, like the motorists on
the highway, and like the yellow trains streaking down the
Santa Fe tracks, drama, in the shape of exceptional
happenings, had never stopped there. The inhabitants of
the village, numbering two hundred and seventy, were
satisfied that this should be so, quite content to exist inside
ordinary life—to work, to hunt, to watch television, to attend
school socials, choir practice, meetings of the 4-H Club.
But then, in the earliest hours of that morning in November,
a Sunday morning, certain foreign sounds impinged on the
normal nightly Holcomb noises—on the keening hysteria of
coyotes, the dry scrape of scuttling tumbleweed, the racing,
receding wail of locomotive whistles. At the time not a soul
in sleeping Holcomb heard them—four shotgun blasts that,
all told, ended six human lives. But afterward the
townspeople, theretofore sufficiently unfearful of each other
to seldom trouble to lock their doors, found fantasy re-
creating them over and again—those somber explosions
that stimulated fires of mistrust in the glare of which many
old neighbors viewed each other strangely, and as
strangers.
The master of River Valley Farm, Herbert William Clutter,
was forty-eight years old, and as a result of a recent
medical examination for an insurance policy, knew himself
to be in first-rate condition. Though he wore rimless
glasses and was of but average height, standing just under
five feet ten, Mr. Clutter cut a man’s-man figure. His
shoulders were broad, his hair had held its dark color, his
square-jawed, confident face retained a healthy-hued
youthfulness, and his teeth, unstained and strong enough to
shatter walnuts, were still intact. He weighed a hundred and
fifty-four—the same as he had the day he graduated from
Kansas State University, where he had majored in
agriculture. He was not as rich as the richest man in
Holcomb—Mr. Taylor Jones, a neighboring rancher. He
was, however, the community’s most widely known citizen,
prominent both there and in Garden City, the close-by
county seat, where he had headed the building committee
for the newly completed First Methodist Church, an eight-
hundred-thousand-dollar edifice. He was currently chairman
of the Kansas Conference of Farm Organizations, and his
name was everywhere respectfully recognized among
Midwestern agriculturists, as it was in certain Washington
offices, where he had been a member of the Federal Farm
Credit Board during the Eisenhower administration.
Always certain of what he wanted from the world, Mr. Clutter
had in large measure obtained it. On his left hand, on what
remained of a finger once mangled by a piece of farm
machinery, he wore a plain gold band, which was the
symbol, a quarter-century old, of his marriage to the person
he had wished to marry—the sister of a college classmate,
a timid, pious, delicate girl named Bonnie Fox, who was
three years younger than he. She had given him four
children—a trio of daughters, then a son. The eldest
daughter, Eveanna, married and the mother of a boy ten
months old, lived in northern Illinois but visited Holcomb
frequently. Indeed, she and her family were expected within
the fortnight, for her parents planned a sizable Thanksgiving
reunion of the Clutter clan (which had its beginnings in
Germany; the first immigrant Clutter—or Klotter, as the
name was then spelled—arrived here in 1880); fifty-odd
kinfolk had been asked, several of whom would be traveling
from places as far away as Palatka, Florida. Nor did
Beverly, the child next in age to Eveanna, any longer reside
at River Valley Farm; she was in Kansas City, Kansas,
studying to be a nurse. Beverly was engaged to a young
biology student, of whom her father very much approved;
invitations to the wedding, scheduled for Christmas Week,
were already printed. Which left, still living at home, the boy,
Kenyon, who at fifteen was taller than Mr. Clutter, and one
sister, a year older—the town darling, Nancy.
In regard to his family, Mr. Clutter had just one serious
cause for disquiet—his wife’s health. She was “nervous,”
she suffered “little spells”—such were the sheltering
expressions used by those close to her. Not that the truth
concerning “poor Bonnie’s afflictions” was in the least a
secret; everyone knew she had been an on-and-off
psychiatric patient the last half-dozen years. Yet even upon
this shadowed terrain sunlight had very lately sparkled. The
past Wednesday, returning from two weeks of treatment at
the Wesley Medical Center in Wichita, her customary place
of retirement, Mrs. Clutter had brought scarcely credible
tidings to tell her husband; with joy she informed him that
the source of her misery, so medical opinion had at last
decreed, was not in her head but in her spine—it was
physical, a matter of misplaced vertebrae. Of course, she
must undergo an operation, and afterward—well, she would
be her “old self” again. Was it possible—the tension, the
withdrawals, the pillow-muted sobbing behind locked
doors, all due to an out-of-order backbone? If so, then Mr.
Clutter could, when addressing his Thanksgiving table,
recite a blessing of unmarred gratitude.
Ordinarily, Mr. Clutter’s mornings began at six-thirty;
clanging milk pails and the whispery chatter of the boys
who brought them, two sons of a hired man named Vic
Irsik, usually roused him. But today he lingered, let Vic
Irsik’s sons come and leave, for the previous evening, a
Friday the thirteenth, had been a tiring one, though in part
exhilarating. Bonnie had resurrected her “old self”; as if
serving up a preview of the normality, the regained vigor,
soon to be, she had rouged her lips, fussed with her hair,
and, wearing a new dress, accompanied him to the
Holcomb School, where they applauded a student
production of Tom Sawyer, in which Nancy played Becky
Thatcher. He had enjoyed it, seeing Bonnie out in public,
nervous but nonetheless smiling, talking to people, and they
both had been proud of Nancy; she had done so well,
remembering all her lines, and looking, as he had said to
her in the course of backstage congratulations, “Just
beautiful, honey—a real Southern belle.” Whereupon Nancy
had behaved like one; curtsying in her hoop-skirted
costume, she had asked if she might drive into Garden
City. The State Theatre was having a special, eleven-thirty,
Friday-the-thirteenth “Spook Show,” and all her friends
were going. In other circumstances Mr. Clutter would have
refused. His laws were laws, and one of them was: Nancy
—and Kenyon, too—must be home by ten on week nights,
by twelve on Saturdays. But weakened by the genial events
of the evening, he had consented. And Nancy had not
returned home until almost two. He had heard her come in,
and had called to her, for though he was not a man ever
really to raise his voice, he had some plain things to say to
her, statements that concerned less the lateness of the hour
than the youngster who had driven her home—a school
basketball hero, Bobby Rupp.
Mr. Clutter liked Bobby, and considered him, for a boy his
age, which was seventeen, most dependable and
gentlemanly; however, in the three years she had been
permitted “dates,” Nancy, popular and pretty as she was,
had never gone out with anyone else, and while Mr. Clutter
understood that it was the present national adolescent
custom to form couples, to “go steady” and wear
“engagement rings,” he disapproved, particularly since he
had not long ago, by accident, surprised his daughter and
the Rupp boy kissing. He had then suggested that Nancy
discontinue “seeing so much of Bobby,” advising her that a
slow retreat now would hurt less than an abrupt severance
later—for, as he reminded her, it was a parting that must
eventually take place. The Rupp family were Roman
Catholics, the Clutters, Methodist—a fact that should in
itself be sufficient to terminate whatever fancies she and
this boy might have of some day marrying. Nancy had been
reasonable—at any rate, she had not argued—and now,
before saying good night, Mr. Clutter secured from her a
promise to begin a gradual breaking off with Bobby.
Still, the incident had lamentably put off his retiring time,
which was ordinarily eleven o’clock. As a consequence, it
was well after seven when he awakened on Saturday,
November 14, 1959. His wife always slept as late as
possible. However, while Mr. Clutter was shaving,
showering, and outfitting himself in whipcord trousers, a
cattleman’s leather jacket, and soft stirrup boots, he had no
fear of disturbing her; they did not share the same
bedroom. For several years he had slept alone in the
master bedroom, on the ground floor of the house—a two-
story, fourteen-room frame-and-brick structure. Though Mrs.
Clutter stored her clothes in the closets of this room, and
kept her few cosmetics and her myriad medicines in the
blue-tile-and-glass-brick bathroom adjoining it, she had
taken for serious occupancy Eveanna’s former bedroom,
which, like Nancy’s and Kenyon’s rooms, was on the
second floor.
The house—for the most part designed by Mr. Clutter, who
thereby proved himself a sensible and sedate, if not notably
decorative, architect—had been built in 1948 for forty
thousand dollars. (The resale value was now sixty thousand
dollars.) Situated at the end of a long, lanelike driveway
shaded by rows of Chinese elms, the handsome white
house, standing on an ample lawn of groomed Bermuda
grass, impressed Holcomb; it was a place people pointed
out. As for the interior, there were spongy displays of liver-
colored carpet intermittently abolishing the glare of
varnished, resounding floors; an immense modernistic
living-room couch covered in nubby fabric interwoven with
glittery strands of silver metal; a breakfast alcove featuring
a banquette upholstered in blue-and-white plastic. This sort
of furnishing was what Mr. and Mrs. Clutter liked, as did the
majority of their acquaintances, whose homes, by and
large, were similarly furnished.
Other than a housekeeper who came in on weekdays, the
Clutters employed no household help, so since his wife’s
illness and the departure of the elder daughters, Mr. Clutter
had of necessity learned to cook; either he or Nancy, but
principally Nancy, prepared the family meals. Mr. Clutter
enjoyed the chore, and was excellent at it—no woman in
Kansas baked a better loaf of salt-rising bread, and his
celebrated coconut cookies were the first item to go at
charity cake sales—but he was not a hearty eater; unlike
his fellow-ranchers, he even preferred Spartan breakfasts.
That morning an apple and a glass of milk were enough for
him; because he touched neither coffee or tea, he was
accustomed to begin the day on a cold stomach. The truth
was he opposed all stimulants, however gentle. He did not
smoke, and of course he did not drink; indeed, he had
never tasted spirits, and was inclined to avoid people who
had—a circumstance that did not shrink his social circle as
much as might be supposed, for the center of that circle
was supplied by the members of Garden City’s First
Methodist Church, a congregation totaling seventeen
hundred, most of whom were as abstemious as Mr. Clutter
could desire. While he was careful to avoid making a
nuisance of his views, to adopt outside his realm an
externally uncensoring manner, he enforced them within his
family and among the employees at River Valley Farm.
“Are you a drinking man?” was the first question he asked a
job applicant, and even though the fellow gave a negative
answer, he still must sign a work contract containing a
clause that declared the agreement instantly void if the
employee should be discovered “harboring alcohol.” A
friend—an old pioneer rancher, Mr. Lynn Russell—had
once told him, “You’ve got no mercy. Iswear, Herb, if you
caught a hired man drinking, out he’d go. And you wouldn’t
care if his family was starving.” It was perhaps the only
criticism ever made of Mr. Clutter as an employer.
Otherwise, he was known for his equanimity, his
charitableness, and the fact that he paid good wages and
distributed frequent bonuses; the men who worked for him
—and there were sometimes as many as eighteen—had
small reason to complain.
After drinking the glass of milk and putting on a fleece-lined
cap, Mr. Clutter carried his apple with him when he went
outdoors to examine the morning. It was ideal apple-eating
weather; the whitest sunlight descended from the purest
sky, and an easterly wind rustled, without ripping loose, the
last of the leaves on the Chinese elms. Autumns reward
western Kansas for the evils that the remaining seasons
impose: winter’s rough Colorado winds and hip-high,
sheep-slaughtering snows; the slushes and the strange
land fogs of spring; and summer, when even crows seek
the puny shade, and the tawny infinitude of wheatstalks
bristle, blaze. At last, after September, another weather
arrives, an Indian summer that occasionally endures until
Christmas. As Mr. Clutter contemplated this superior
specimen of the season, he was joined by a part-collie
mongrel, and together they ambled off toward the livestock
corral, which was adjacent to one of three barns on the
premises.
One of these barns was a mammoth Quonset hut; it
brimmed with grain—Westland sorghum—and one of them
housed a dark, pungent hill of milo grain worth considerable
money—a hundred thousand dollars. That figure alone
represented an almost four-thousand-percent advance over
Mr. Clutter’s entire income in 1934—the year he married
Bonnie Fox and moved with her from their home town of
Rozel, Kansas, to Garden City, where he had found work
as an assistant to the Finney County agricultural agent.
Typically, it took him just seven months to be promoted; that
is, to install himself in the head man’s job. The years during
which he held the post—1935 to 1939—encompassed the
dustiest, the down-and-outest the region had known since
white men settled there, and young Herb Clutter, having, as
he did, a brain expertly racing with the newest in
streamlined agricultural practices, was quite qualified to
serve as middleman between the government and the
despondent farm ranchers; these men could well use the
optimism and the educated instruction of a likable young
fellow who seemed to know his business. All the same, he
was not doing what he wanted to do; the son of a farmer, he
had from the beginning aimed at operating a property of his
own. Facing up to it, he resigned as county agent after four
years and, on land leased with borrowed money, created,
in embryo, River Valley Farm (a name justified by the
Arkansas River’s meandering presence but not, certainly,
by any evidence of valley). It was an endeavor that several
Finney County conservatives watched with show-us
amusement—old-timers who had been fond of baiting the
youthful county agent on the subject of his university notions:
“That’s fine, Herb. You always know what’s best to do on
the other fellow’s land. Plant this. Terrace that. But you
might say a sight different if the place was your own.” They
were mistaken; the upstart’s experiments succeeded—
partly because, in the beginning years, he labored eighteen
hours a day. Setbacks occurred—twice the wheat crop
failed, and one winter he lost several hundred head of
sheep in a blizzard; but after a decade Mr. Clutter’s domain
consisted of over eight hundred acres owned outright and
three thousand more worked on a rental basis—and that,
as his colleagues admitted, was “a pretty good spread.”
Wheat, milo seed, certified grass seed—these were the
crops the farm’s prosperity depended upon. Animals were
also important—sheep, and especially cattle. A herd of
several hundred Hereford bore the Clutter brand, though
one would not have suspected it from the scant contents of
the livestock corral, which was reserved for ailing steers, a
few milking cows, Nancy’s cats, and Babe, the family
favorite—an old fat workhorse who never objected to
lumbering about with three and four children astride her
broad back.
Mr. Clutter now fed Babe the core of his apple, calling good
morning to a man raking debris inside the corral—Alfred
Stoecklein, the sole resident employee. The Stoeckleins
and their three children lived in a house not a hundred yards
from the main house; except for them, the Clutters had no
neighbors within half a mile. A long-faced man with long
brown teeth, Stoecklein asked, “Have you some particular
work in mind today? Cause we got a sick-un. The baby. Me
and Missis been up and down with her most the night. I
been thinking to carry her to doctor.” And Mr. Clutter,
expressing sympathy, said by all means to take the
morning off, and if there was any way he or his wife could
help, please let them know. Then, with the dog running
ahead of him, he moved southward toward the fields, lion-
colored now, luminously golden with after-harvest stubble.
The river lay in this direction; near its bank stood a grove of
fruit trees—peach, pear, cherry, and apple. Fifty years ago,
according to native memory, it would have taken a
lumberjack ten minutes to axe all the trees in western
Kansas. Even today, only cottonwoods and Chinese elms
—perennials with a cactuslike indifference to thirst—are
commonly planted. However, as Mr. Clutter often remarked,
“an inch more of rain and this country would be paradise—
Eden on earth.” The little collection of fruit-bearers growing
by the river was his attempt to contrive, rain or no, a patch
of the paradise, the green, apple-scented Eden, he
envisioned. His wife once said, “My husband cares more
for those trees than he does for his children,” and everyone
in Holcomb recalled the day a small disabled plane
crashed into the peach trees: “Herb was fit to be tied! Why,
the propeller hadn’t stopped turning before he’d slapped a
lawsuit on the pilot.”
Passing through the orchard, Mr. Clutter proceeded along
beside the river, which was shallow here and strewn with
islands—midstream beaches of soft sand, to which, on
Sundays gone by, hot-weather Sabbaths when Bonnie had
still “felt up to things,” picnic baskets had been carted,
family afternoons whiled away waiting for a twitch at the end
of a fishline. Mr. Clutter seldom encountered trespassers
on his property; a mile and a half from the highway, and
arrived at by obscure roads, it was not a place that
strangers came upon by chance. Now, suddenly a whole
party of them appeared, and Teddy, the dog, rushed
forward roaring out a challenge. But it was odd about
Teddy. Though he was a good sentry, alert, ever ready to
raise Cain, his valor had one flaw: let him glimpse a gun, as
he did now—for the intruders were armed—and his head
dropped, his tail turned in. No one understood why, for no
one knew his history, other than that he was a vagabond
Kenyon had adopted years ago. The visitors proved to be
five pheasant hunters from Oklahoma. The pheasant
season in Kansas, a famed November event, lures hordes
of sportsmen from adjoining states, and during the past
week plaid-hatted regiments had paraded across the
autumnal expanses, flushing and felling with rounds of
birdshot great coppery flights of the grain-fattened birds. By
custom, the hunters, if they are not invited guests, are
supposed to pay the landowner a fee for letting them
pursue their quarry on his premises, but when the
Oklahomans offered to hire hunting rights, Mr. Clutter was
amused. “I’m not as poor as Ilook. Go ahead, get all you
can,” he said. Then, touching the brim of his cap, he
headed for home and the day’s work, unaware that it would
be his last.
Like Mr. Clutter, the young man breakfasting in a café
called the Little Jewel never drank coffee. He preferred root
beer. Three aspirin, cold root beer, and a chain of Pall Mall
cigarettes—that was his notion of a proper “chow-down.”
Sipping and smoking, he studied a map spread on the
counter before him—a Phillips 66 map of Mexico—but it
was difficult to concentrate, for he was expecting a friend,
and the friend was late. He looked out a window at the
silent small-town street, a street he had never seen until
yesterday. Still no sign of Dick. But he was sure to show up;
after all, the purpose of their meeting was Dick’s idea, his
“score.” And when it was settled—Mexico. The map was
ragged, so thumbed that it had grown as supple as a piece
of chamois. Around the corner, in his room at the hotel
where he was staying, were hundreds more like it—worn
maps of every state in the Union, every Canadian province,
every South American country—for the young man was an
incessant conceiver of voyages, not a few of which he had
actually taken: to Alaska, to Hawaii and Japan, to Hong
Kong. Now, thanks to a letter, an invitation to a “score,”
here he was with all his worldly belongings: one cardboard
suitcase, a guitar, and two big boxes of books and maps
and songs, poems and old letters, weighing a quarter of a
ton. (Dick’s face when he saw those boxes! “Christ, Perry.
You carry that junk everywhere?” And Perry had said, “What
junk? One of them books cost me thirty bucks.”) Here he
was in little Olathe, Kansas. Kind of funny, if you thought
about it; imagine being back in Kansas, when only four
months ago he had sworn, first to the State Parole Board,
then to himself, that he would never set foot within its
boundaries again. Well, it wasn’t for long.
Ink-circled names populated the map. COZUMEL, an island off
the coast of Yucatán, where, so he had read in a men’s
magazine, you could “shed your clothes, put on a relaxed
grin, live like a Rajah, and have all the women you want for
$50-a-month!” From the same article he had memorized
other appealing statements: “Cozumel is a hold-out against
social, economic, and political pressure. No official pushes
any private person around on this island,” and “Every year
flights of parrots come over from the mainland to lay their
eggs.” ACAPULCO connoted deep-sea fishing, casinos,
anxious rich women; and SIERRA MADRE meant gold, meant
Treasure of the Sierra Madre, a movie he had seen eight
times. (It was Bogart’s best picture, but the old guy who
played the prospector, the one who reminded Perry of his
father, was terrific, too. Walter Huston. Yes, and what he
had told Dick was true: He did know the ins and outs of
hunting gold, having been taught them by his father, who
was a professional prospector. So why shouldn’t they, the
two of them, buy a pair of pack horses and try their luck in
the Sierra Madre? But Dick, the practical Dick, had said,
“Whoa, honey, whoa. Iseen that show. Ends up everybody
nuts. On account of fever and bloodsuckers, mean
conditions all around. Then, when they got the gold—
remember, a big wind came along and blew it all away?”)
Perry folded the map. He paid for the root beer and stood
up. Sitting, he had seemed a more than normal-sized man,
a powerful man, with the shoulders, the arms, the thick,
crouching torso of a weight lifter—weight lifting was, in fact,
his hobby. But some sections of him were not in proportion
to others. His tiny feet, encased in short black boots with
steel buckles, would have neatly fitted into a delicate lady’s
dancing slippers; when he stood up, he was no taller than a
twelve-year-old child, and suddenly looked, strutting on
stunted legs that seemed grotesquely inadequate to the
grown-up bulk they supported, not like a well-built truck
driver but like a retired jockey, overblown and muscle-
bound.
Outside the drugstore, Perry stationed himself in the sun. It
was a quarter to nine, and Dick was a half hour late;
however, if Dick had not hammered home the every-minute
importance of the next twenty-four hours, he would not have
noticed it. Time rarely weighed upon him, for he had many
methods of passing it—among them, mirror gazing. Dick
had once observed, “Every time you see a mirror you go
into a trance, like. Like you was looking at some gorgeous
piece of butt. Imean, my God, don’t you ever get tired?” Far
from it; his own face enthralled him. Each angle of it
induced a different impression. It was a changeling’s face,
and mirror-guided experiments had taught him how to ring
the changes, how to look now ominous, now impish, now
soulful; a tilt of the head, a twist of the lips, and the corrupt
gypsy became the gentle romantic. His mother had been a
full-blooded Cherokee; it was from her that he had inherited
his coloring—the iodine skin, the dark, moist eyes, the
black hair, which he kept brilliantined and was plentiful
enough to provide him with sideburns and a slippery spray
of bangs. His mother’s donation was apparent; that of his
father, a freckled, ginger-haired Irishman, was less so. It
was as though the Indian blood had routed every trace of
the Celtic strain. Still, pink lips and a perky nose confirmed
its presence, as did a quality of roguish animation, of uppity
Irish egotism, which often activated the Cherokee mask
and took control completely when he played the guitar and
sang. Singing, and the thought of doing so in front of an
audience, was another mesmeric way of whittling hours. He
always used the same mental scenery—a night club in Las
Vegas, which happened to be his home town. It was an
elegant room filled with celebrities excitedly focused on the
sensational new star rendering his famous, backed-by-
violins version of “I’ll Be Seeing You” and encoring with his
latest self-composed ballad:
Every April flights of parrots
Fly overhead, red and green,
Green and tangerine.
Isee them fly, Ihear them high,
Singing parrots bringing April spring . . .
(Dick, on first hearing this song, had commented, “Parrots
don’t sing. Talk maybe. Holler. But they sure as hell don’t
sing.” Of course, Dick was very literal-minded, very—he
had no understanding of music, poetry—and yet when you
got right down to it, Dick’s literalness, his pragmatic
approach to every subject, was the primary reason Perry
had been attracted to him, for it made Dick seem,
compared to himself, so authentically tough, invulnerable,
“totally masculine.”)
Nevertheless, pleasant as this Las Vegas reverie was, it
paled beside another of his visions. Since childhood, for
more than half his thirty-one years, he had been sending off
for literature (“FORTUNES IN DIVING! Train at Home in Your
Spare Time. Make Big Money Fast in Skin and Lung
Diving. FREE BOOKLETS . . .”), answering advertisements
(“SUNKEN TREASURE! Fifty Genuine Maps! Amazing Offer . . .”)
that stoked a longing to realize an adventure his
imagination swiftly and over and over enabled him to
experience: the dream of drifting downward through
strange waters, of plunging toward a green sea-dusk,
sliding past the scaly, savage-eyed protectors of a ship’s
hulk that loomed ahead, a Spanish galleon—a drowned
cargo of diamonds and pearls, heaping caskets of gold.
A car horn honked. At last—Dick.
“Good grief, Kenyon! Ihear you.”
As usual, the devil was in Kenyon. His shouts kept coming
up the stairs: “Nancy! Telephone!”
Barefoot, pajama-clad, Nancy scampered down the stairs.
There were two telephones in the house—one in the room
her father used as an office, another in the kitchen. She
picked up the kitchen extension: “Hello? Oh, yes, good
morning, Mrs. Katz.”
And Mrs. Clarence Katz, the wife of a farmer who lived on
the highway, said, “Itold your daddy not to wake you up. I
said Nancy must be tired after all that wonderful acting she
did last night. You were lovely, dear. Those white ribbons in
your hair! And that part when you thought Tom Sawyer was
dead—you had real tears in your eyes. Good as anything
on TV. But your daddy said it was time you got up; well, it is
going on for nine. Now, what Iwanted, dear—my little girl,
my little Jolene, she’s just dying to bake a cherry pie, and
seeing how you’re a champion cherry-pie maker, always
winning prizes, Iwondered could Ibring her over there this
morning and you show her?”
Normally, Nancy would willingly have taught Jolene to
prepare an entire turkey dinner; she felt it her duty to be
available when younger girls came to her wanting help with
their cooking, their sewing, or their music lessons—or, as
often happened, to confide. Where she found the time, and
still managed to “practically run that big house” and be a
straight-A student, the president of her class, a leader in the
4-H program and the Young Methodists League, a skilled
rider, an excellent musician (piano, clarinet), an annual
winner at the county fair (pastry, preserves, needlework,
flower arrangement)—how a girl not yet seventeen could
haul such a wagonload, and do so without “brag,” with,
rather, merely a radiant jauntiness, was an enigma the
community pondered, and solved by saying, “She’s got
character. Gets it from her old man.” Certainly her strongest
trait, the talent that gave support to all the others, derived
from her father: a fine-honed sense of organization. Each
moment was assigned; she knew precisely, at any hour,
what she would be doing, how long it would require. And
that was the trouble with today: she had overscheduled it.
She had committed herself to helping another neighbor’s
child, Roxie Lee Smith, with a trumpet solo that Roxie Lee
planned to play at a school concert; had promised to run
three complicated errands for her mother; and had
arranged to attend a 4-H meeting in Garden City with her
father. And then there was lunch to make and, after lunch,
work to be done on the bridesmaids’ dresses for Beverly’s
wedding, which she had designed and was sewing herself.
As matters stood, there was no room for Jolene’s cherry-
pie lesson. Unless something could be canceled.
“Mrs. Katz? Will you hold the line a moment, please?”
She walked the length of the house to her father’s office.
The office, which had an outside entrance for ordinary
visitors, was separated from the parlor by a sliding door;
though Mr. Clutter occasionally shared the office with
Gerald Van Vleet, a young man who assisted him with the
management of the farm, it was fundamentally his retreat—
an orderly sanctuary, paneled in walnut veneer, where,
surrounded by weather barometers, rain charts, a pair of
binoculars, he sat like a captain in his cabin, a navigator
piloting River Valley’s sometimes risky passage through
the seasons.
“Never mind,” he said, responding to Nancy’s problem.
“Skip 4-H. I’ll take Kenyon instead.”
And so, lifting the office phone, Nancy told Mrs. Katz yes,
fine, bring Jolene right on over. But she hung up with a
frown. “It’s so peculiar,” she said as she looked around the
room and saw in it her father helping Kenyon add a column
of figures, and, at his desk by the window, Mr. Van Vleet,
who had a kind of brooding, rugged good looks that led her
to call him Heathcliff behind his back. “But Ikeep smelling
cigarette smoke.”
“On your breath?” inquired Kenyon.
“No, funny one. Yours.”
That quieted him, for Kenyon, as he knew she knew, did
once in a while sneak a puff—but, then, so did Nancy.
Mr. Clutter clapped his hands. “That’s all. This is an office.”
Now, upstairs, she changed into faded Levis and a green
sweater, and fastened round her wrist her third-most-valued
belonging, a gold watch; her closest cat friend, Evinrude,
ranked above it, and surmounting even Evinrude was
Bobby’s signet ring, the cumbersome proof of her “going-
steady” status, which she wore (when she wore it; the least
flare-up and off it came) on a thumb, for even with the use of
adhesive tape its man-size girth could not be made to fit a
more suitable finger. Nancy was a pretty girl, lean and
boyishly agile, and the prettiest things about her were her
short-bobbed, shining chestnut hair (brushed a hundred
strokes each morning, the same number at night) and her
soap-polished complexion, still faintly freckled and rose-
brown from last summer’s sun. But it was her eyes, wide
apart, darkly translucent, like ale held to the light, that made
her immediately likable, that at once announced her lack of
suspicion, her considered and yet so easily triggered
kindliness.
“Nancy!” Kenyon called. “Susan on the phone.”
Susan Kidwell, her confidante. Again she answered in the
kitchen.
“Tell,” said Susan, who invariably launched a telephone
session with this command. “And, to begin, tell why you
were flirting with Jerry Roth.” Like Bobby, Jerry Roth was a
school basketball star.
“Last night? Good grief, Iwasn’t flirting. You mean because
we were holding hands? He just came backstage during
the show. And Iwas so nervous. So he held my hand. To
give me courage.”
“Very sweet. Then what?”
“Bobby took me to the spook movie. And we held hands.”
“Was it scary? Not Bobby. The movie.”
“He didn’t think so; he just laughed. But you know me. Boo!
—and Ifall off the seat.”
“What are you eating?”
“Nothing.”
“Iknow—your fingernails,” said Susan, guessing correctly.
Much as Nancy tried, she could not break the habit of
nibbling her nails, and, whenever she was troubled,
chewing them right to the quick. “Tell. Something wrong?”
“No. ”
“Nancy. C’est moi. . .” Susan was studying French.
“Well—Daddy. He’s been in an awful mood the last three
weeks. Awful. At least, around me. And when Igot home
last night he started that again.”
“That”needed no amplification; it was a subject that the two
friends had discussed completely, and upon which they
agreed. Susan, summarizing the problem from Nancy’s
viewpoint, had once said, “You love Bobby now, and you
need him. But deep down even Bobby knows there isn’t
any future in it. Later on, when we go off to Manhattan,
everything will seem a new world.” Kansas State University
is in Manhattan, and the two girls planned to enroll there as
art students, and to room together. “Everything will change,
whether you want it to or not. But you can’t change it now,
living here in Holcomb, seeing Bobby every day, sitting in
the same classes—and there’s no reason to. Because you
and Bobby are a very happy thing. And it will be something
happy to think back about—if you’re left alone. Can’t you
make your father understand that?” No, she could not.
“Because,” as she explained it to Susan, “whenever Istart
to say something, he looks at me as though Imust not love
him. Or as though Iloved him less. And suddenly I’m
tongue-tied; Ijust want to be his daughter and do as he
wishes.” To this Susan had no reply; it embodied emotions,
a relationship, beyond her experience. She lived alone with
her mother, who taught music at the Holcomb School, and
she did not remember her own father very clearly, for years
ago, in their native California, Mr. Kidwell had one day left
home and not come back.
“And, anyway,” Nancy continued now, “I’m not sure it’s me.
That’s making him grouchy. Something else—he’s really
worried about something.”
“Your mother?”
No other friend of Nancy’s would have presumed to make
such a suggestion. Susan, however, was privileged. When
she had first appeared in Holcomb, a melancholy,
imaginative child, willowy and wan and sensitive, then eight,
a year younger than Nancy, the Clutters had so ardently
adopted her that the fatherless little girl from California
soon came to seem a member of the family. For seven
years the two friends had been inseparable, each, by virtue
of the rarity of similar and equal sensibilities, irreplaceable
to the other. But then, this past September, Susan had
transferred from the local school to the vaster, supposedly
superior one in Garden City. It was the usual procedure for
Holcomb students who intended going on to college, but
Mr. Clutter, a die-hard community booster, considered such
defections an affront to community spirit; the Holcomb
School was good enough for his children, and there they
would remain. Thus, the girls were no longer always
together, and Nancy deeply felt the daytime absence of her
friend, the one person with whom she need be neither
brave nor reticent.
“Well. But we’re all so happy about Mother—you heard the
wonderful news.” Then Nancy said, “Listen,” and hesitated,
as if summoning nerve to make an outrageous remark.
“Why do Ikeep smelling smoke? Honestly, Ithink I’m losing
my mind. Iget into the car, Iwalk into a room, and it’s as
though somebody had just been there, smoking a cigarette.
It isn’t Mother, it can’t be Kenyon. Kenyon wouldn’t dare . . .”
Nor, very likely, would any visitor to the Clutter home, which
was pointedly devoid of ashtrays. Slowly, Susan grasped
the implication, but it was ludicrous. Regardless of what his
private anxieties might be, she could not believe that Mr.
Clutter was finding secret solace in tobacco. Before she
could ask if this was really what Nancy meant, Nancy cut
her off: “Sorry, Susie. I’ve got to go. Mrs. Katz is here.”
Dick was driving a black 1949 Chevrolet sedan. As Perry
got in, he checked the back seat to see if his guitar was
safely there; the previous night, after playing for a party of
Dick’s friends, he had forgotten and left it in the car. It was
an old Gibson guitar, sandpapered and waxed to a honey-
yellow finish. Another sort of instrument lay beside it—a
twelve-gauge pump-action shotgun, brand-new, blue-
barreled, and with a sportsman’s scene of pheasants in
flight etched along the stock. A flashlight, a fishing knife, a
pair of leather gloves, and a hunting vest fully packed with
shells contributed further atmosphere to this curious still life.
“You wearing that?” Perry asked, indicating the vest.
Dick rapped his knuckles against the windshield. “Knock,
knock. Excuse me, sir. We’ve been out hunting and lost our
way. If we could use the phone. . . ”
“Si, señor. Yo comprendo.”
“A cinch,” said Dick. “Ipromise you, honey, we’ll blast hair
all over them walls.”
“ ‘Those’ walls,” said Perry. A dictionary buff, a devotee of
obscure words, he had been intent on improving his
companion’s grammar and expanding his vocabulary ever
since they had celled together at Kansas State
Penitentiary. Far from resenting these lessons, the pupil, to
please his tutor, once composed a sheaf of poems, and
though the verses were very obscene, Perry, who thought
them nevertheless hilarious, had had the manuscript
leather-bound in a prison shop and its title, Dirty Jokes,
stamped in gold.
Dick was wearing a blue jumper suit; lettering stitched
across the back of it advertised BOB SANDS’ BODY SHOP. He
and Perry drove along the main street of Olathe until they
arrived at the Bob Sands establishment, an auto-repair
garage, where Dick had been employed since his release
from the penitentiary in mid-August. A capable mechanic,
he earned sixty dollars a week. He deserved no salary for
the work he planned to do this morning, but Mr. Sands, who
left him in charge on Saturdays, would never know he had
paid his hireling to overhaul his own car. With Perry
assisting him, he went to work. They changed the oil,
adjusted the clutch, recharged the battery, replaced a
throw-out bearing, and put new tires on the rear wheels—all
necessary undertakings, for between today and tomorrow
the aged Chevrolet was expected to perform punishing
feats.
“Because the old man was around,” said Dick, answering
Perry, who wanted to know why he had been late in
meeting him at the Little Jewel. “Ididn’t want him to see me
taking the gun out of the house. Christ, then he would have
knowed Iwasn’t telling the truth.”
“ ‘Known.’ But what did you say? Finally?”
“Like we said. Isaid we’d be gone overnight—said we was
going to visit your sister in Fort Scott. On account of she
was holding money for you. Fifteen hundred dollars.” Perry
had a sister, and had once had two, but the surviving one
did not live in Fort Scott, a Kansas town eighty-five miles
from Olathe; in fact, he was uncertain of her present
address.
“And was he sore?”
“Why should he be sore?”
“Because he hates me,” said Perry, whose voice was both
gentle and prim—a voice that, though soft, manufactured
each word exactly, ejected it like a smoke ring issuing from
a parson’s mouth. “So does your mother. Icould see—the
ineffable way they looked at me.”
Dick shrugged. “Nothing to do with you. As such. It’s just
they don’t like me seeing anybody from The Walls.” Twice
married, twice divorced, now twenty-eight and the father of
three boys, Dick had received his parole on the condition
that he reside with his parents; the family, which included a
younger brother, lived on a small farm near Olathe.
“Anybody wearing the fraternity pin,” he added, and
touched a blue dot tattooed under his left eye—an insigne,
a visible password, by which certain former prison inmates
could identify him.
“Iunderstand,” said Perry. “Isympathize with that. They’re
good people. She’s a real sweet person, your mother.”
Dick nodded; he thought so, too.
At noon they put down their tools, and Dick, racing the
engine, listening to the consistent hum, was satisfied that a
thorough job had been done.
Nancy and her protégée, Jolene Katz, were also satisfied
with their morning’s work; indeed, the latter, a thin thirteen-
year-old, was agog with pride. For the longest while she
stared at the blue-ribbon winner, the oven-hot cherries
simmering under the crisp lattice crust, and then she was
overcome, and hugging Nancy, asked, “Honest, did Ireally
make it myself?” Nancy laughed, returned the embrace,
and assured her that she had—with a little help.
Jolene urged that they sample the pie at once—no
nonsense about leaving it to cool. “Please, let’s both have a
piece. And you, too,” she said to Mrs. Clutter who had
come into the kitchen. Mrs. Clutter smiled—attempted to;
her head ached—and said thank you, but she hadn’t the
appetite. As for Nancy, she hadn’t the time; Roxie Lee
Smith, and Roxie Lee’s trumpet solo, awaited her, and
afterward those errands for her mother, one of which
concerned a bridal shower that some Garden City girls
were organizing for Beverly, and another the Thanksgiving
gala.
“You go, dear, I’ll keep Jolene company until her mother
comes for her,” Mrs. Clutter said, and then, addressing the
child with unconquerable timidity, added, “If Jolene doesn’t
mind keeping me company.” As a girl she had won an
elocution prize; maturity, it seemed, had reduced her voice
to a single tone, that of apology, and her personality to a
series of gestures blurred by the fear that she might give
offense, in some way displease. “Ihope you understand,”
she continued after her daughter’s departure. “Ihope you
won’t think Nancy rude?”
“Goodness, no. Ijust love her to death. Well, everybody
does. There isn’t anybody like Nancy. Do you know what
Mrs. Stringer says?” said Jolene, naming her home-
economics teacher. “One day she told the class, ‘Nancy
Clutter is always in a hurry, but she always has time. And
that’s one definition of a lady.’ ”
“Yes,” replied Mrs. Clutter. “All my children are very efficient.
They don’t need me.”
Jolene had never before been alone with Nancy’s “strange”
mother, but despite discussions she had heard, she felt
much at ease, for Mrs. Clutter, though unrelaxed herself,
had a relaxing quality, as is generally true of defenseless
persons who present no threat; even in Jolene, a very
childlike child, Mrs. Clutter’s heart-shaped, missionary’s
face, her look of helpless, homespun ethereality aroused
protective compassion. But to think that she was Nancy’s
mother! An aunt—that seemed possible; a visiting spinster
aunt, slightly odd, but nice.
“No, they don’t need me,” she repeated, pouring herself a
cup of coffee. Though all the other members of the family
observed her husband’s boycott of this beverage, she
drank two cups every morning and often as not ate nothing
else the rest of the day. She weighed ninety-eight pounds;
rings—a wedding band and one set with a diamond
modest to the point of meekness—wobbled on one of her
bony hands.
Jolene cut a piece of pie. “Boy!” she said, wolfing it down.
“I’m going to make one of these every day seven days a
week.”
“Well, you have all those little brothers, and boys can eat a
lot of pie. Mr. Clutter and Kenyon, Iknow they never get
tired of them. But the cook does—Nancy just turns up her
nose. It’ll be the same with you. No, no—why do Isay that?”
Mrs. Clutter, who wore rimless glasses, removed them and
pressed her eyes. “Forgive me, dear. I’m sure you’ll never
know what it is to be tired. I’m sure you’ll always be
happy . . .”
Jolene was silent. The note of panic in Mrs. Clutter’s voice
had caused her to have a shift of feeling; Jolene was
confused, and wished that her mother, who had promised
to call back for her at eleven, would come.
Presently, more calmly, Mrs. Clutter asked, “Do you like
miniature things? Tiny things?” and invited Jolene into the
dining room to inspect the shelves of a whatnot on which
were arranged assorted Lilliputian gewgaws—scissors,
thimbles, crystal flower baskets, toy figurines, forks and
knives. “I’ve had some of these since Iwas a child. Daddy
and Mama—all of us—spent part of most years in
California. By the ocean. And there was a shop that sold
such precious little things. These cups.” A set of doll-house
teacups, anchored to a diminutive tray, trembled in the
palm of her hand. “Daddy gave them to me; Ihad a lovely
childhood.”
The only daughter of a prosperous wheat grower named
Fox, the adored sister of three older brothers, she had not
been spoiled but spared, led to suppose that life was a
sequence of agreeable events—Kansas autumns,
California summers, a round of teacup gifts. When she was
eighteen, inflamed by a biography of Florence Nightingale,
she enrolled as a student nurse at St. Rose’s Hospital in
Great Bend, Kansas. She was not meant to be a nurse,
and after two years she confessed it: a hospital’s realities
—scenes, odors—sickened her. Yet to this day she
regretted not having completed the course and received
her diploma—“just to prove,” as she had told a friend, “that I
once succeeded at something.” Instead, she had met and
married Herb, a college classmate of her oldest brother,
Glenn; actually, since the two families lived within twenty
miles of each other, she had long known him by sight, but
the Clutters, plain farm people, were not on visiting terms
with the well-to-do and cultivated Foxes. However, Herb
was handsome, he was pious, he was strong-willed, he
wanted her—and she was in love.
“Mr. Clutter travels a great deal,” she said to Jolene. “Oh,
he’s always headed somewhere. Washington and Chicago
and Oklahoma and Kansas City—sometimes it seems like
he’s never home. But wherever he goes, he remembers
how Idote on tiny things.” She unfolded a little paper fan.
“He brought me this from San Francisco. It only cost a
penny. But isn’t it pretty?”
The second year of the marriage, Eveanna was born, and
three years later, Beverly; after each confinement the young
mother had experienced an inexplicable despondency—
seizures of grief that sent her wandering from room to room
in a hand-wringing daze. Between the births of Beverly and
Nancy, three more years elapsed, and these were the
years of the Sunday picnics and of summer excursions to
Colorado, the years when she really ran her own home and
was the happy center of it. But with Nancy and then with
Kenyon, the pattern of postnatal depression repeated itself,
and following the birth of her son, the mood of misery that
descended never altogether lifted; it lingered like a cloud
that might rain or might not. She knew “good days,” and
occasionally they accumulated into weeks, months, but
even on the best of the good days, those days when she
was otherwise her “old self,” the affectionate and charming
Bonnie her friends cherished, she could not summon the
social vitality her husband’s pyramiding activities required.
He was a “joiner,” a “born leader”; she was not and stopped
attempting to be. And so, along paths bordered by tender
regard, by total fidelity, they began to go their semi-
separate ways—his a public route, a march of satisfying
conquests, and hers a private one that eventually wound
through hospital corridors. But she was not without hope.
Trust in God sustained her, and from time to time secular
sources supplemented her faith in His forthcoming mercy;
she read of a miracle medicine, heard of a new therapy, or,
as most recently, decided to believe that a “pinched nerve”
was to blame.
“Little things really belong to you,” she said, folding the fan.
“They don’t have to be left behind. You can carry them in a
shoebox.”
“Carry them where to?”
“Why, wherever you go. You might be gone for a long time.”
Some years earlier Mrs. Clutter had traveled to Wichita for
two weeks of treatment and remained two months. On the
advice of a doctor, who had thought the experience would
aid her to regain “a sense of adequacy and usefulness,”
she had taken an apartment, then found a job—as a file
clerk at the Y.W.C.A. Her husband, entirely sympathetic,
had encouraged the adventure, but she had liked it too well,
so much that it seemed to her unchristian, and the sense of
guilt she in consequence developed ultimately outweighed
the experiment’s therapeutic value.
“Or you might never go home. And—it’s important always to
have with you something of your own. That’s really yours.”
The doorbell rang. It was Jolene’s mother.
Mrs. Clutter said, “Goodbye, dear,” and pressed into
Jolene’s hand the paper fan. “It’s only a penny thing—but
it’s pretty.”
Afterward Mrs. Clutter was alone in the house. Kenyon and
Mr. Clutter had gone to Garden City; Gerald Van Vleet had
left for the day; and the housekeeper, the blessed Mrs.
Helm to whom she could confide anything, did not come to
work on Saturdays. She might as well go back to bed—the
bed she so rarely abandoned that poor Mrs. Helm had to
battle for the chance to change its linen twice a week.
There were four bedrooms on the second floor, and hers
was the last at the end of a spacious hall, which was bare
except for a baby crib that had been bought for the visits of
her grandson. If cots were brought in and the hall was used
as a dormitory, Mrs. Clutter estimated, the house could
accommodate twenty guests during the Thanksgiving
holidays; the others would have to lodge at motels or with
neighbors. Among the Clutter kinfolk the Thanksgiving get-
together was an annual, turnabout to-do, and this year Herb
was the appointed host, so it had to be done, but
coinciding, as it did, with the preparations for Beverly’s
wedding, Mrs. Clutter despaired of surviving either project.
Both involved the necessity of making decisions—a
process she had always disliked, and had learned to
dread, for when her husband was off on one of his business
journeys she was continually expected, in his absence, to
supply snap judgments concerning the affairs of the farm,
and it was unendurable, a torment. What if she made a
mistake? What if Herb should be displeased? Better to
lock the bedroom door and pretend not to hear, or say, as
she sometimes did, “Ican’t. Idon’t know. Please.”
The room she so seldom left was austere; had the bed
been made, a visitor might have thought it permanently
unoccupied. An oak bed, a walnut bureau, a bedside table
—nothing else except lamps, one curtained window, and a
picture of Jesus walking on the water. It was as though by
keeping this room impersonal, by not importing her intimate
belongings but leaving them mingled with those of her
husband, she lessened the offense of not sharing his
quarters. The only used drawer in the bureau contained a
jar of Vick’s Vaporub, Kleenex, an electric heating pad, a
number of white nightgowns, and white cotton socks. She
always wore a pair of these socks to bed, for she was
always cold. And, for the same reason, she habitually kept
her windows closed. Summer before last, on a sweltering
August Sunday, when she was secluded here, a difficult
incident had taken place. There were guests that day, a
party of friends who had been invited to the farm to pick
mulberries, and among them was Wilma Kidwell, Susan’s
mother. Like most of the people who were often entertained
by the Clutters, Mrs. Kidwell accepted the absence of the
hostess without comment, and assumed, as was the
custom, that she was either “indisposed” or “away in
Wichita.” In any event, when the hour came to go to the fruit
orchard, Mrs. Kidwell declined; a city-bred woman, easily
fatigued, she wished to remain indoors. Later, while she
was awaiting the return of the mulberry pickers, she heard
the sound of weeping, heartbroken, heartbreaking.
“Bonnie?” she called, and ran up the stairs, ran down the
hall to Bonnie’s room. When she opened it, the heat
gathered inside the room was like a sudden, awful hand
over her mouth; she hurried to open a window. “Don’t!”
Bonnie cried. “I’m not hot. I’m cold. I’m freezing. Lord, Lord,
Lord!” She flailed her arms. “Please, Lord, don’t let
anybody see me this way.” Mrs. Kidwell sat down on the
bed; she wanted to hold Bonnie in her arms, and eventually
Bonnie let herself be held. “Wilma,” she said, “I’ve been
listening to you, Wilma. All of you. Laughing. Having a good
time. I’m missing out on everything. The best years, the
children—everything. A little while, and even Kenyon will be
grown up—a man. And how will he remember me? As a
kind of ghost, Wilma.”
Now, on this final day of her life, Mrs. Clutter hung in the
closet the calico housedress she had been wearing, and
put on one of her trailing nightgowns and a fresh set of
white socks. Then, before retiring, she exchanged her
ordinary glasses for a pair of reading spectacles. Though
she subscribed to several periodicals (the Ladies’Home
Journal, McCall’s, Reader’s Digest, and Together:
Midmonth Magazine for Methodist Families), none of
these rested on the bedside table—only a Bible. A
bookmark lay between its pages, a stiff piece of watered
silk upon which an admonition had been embroidered:
“Take ye heed, watch and pray: for ye know not when the
time is.”
The two young men had little in common, but they did not
realize it, for they shared a number of surface traits. Both,
for example, were fastidious, very attentive to hygiene and
the condition of their fingernails. After their grease-monkey
morning, they spent the better part of an hour sprucing up in
the lavatory of the garage. Dick stripped to his briefs was
not quite the same as Dick fully clothed. In the latter state,
he seemed a flimsy dingy-blond youth of medium height,
fleshless and perhaps sunken-chested; disrobing revealed
that he was nothing of the sort, but, rather, an athlete
constructed on a welterweight scale. The tattooed face of a
cat, blue and grinning, covered his right hand; on one
shoulder a blue rose blossomed. More markings, self-
designed and self-executed, ornamented his arms and
torso: the head of a dragon with a human skull between its
open jaws; bosomy nudes; a gremlin brandishing a
pitchfork; the word PEACE accompanied by a cross
radiating, in the form of crude strokes, rays of holy light; and
two sentimental concoctions—one a bouquet of flowers
dedicated to MOTHER-DAD, the other a heart that celebrated
the romance of DICK and CAROL, the girl whom he had
married when he was nineteen, and from whom he had
separated six years later in order to “do the right thing” by
another young lady, the mother of his youngest child. (“I
have three boys who Iwill definitely take care of,” he had
written in applying for parole. “My wife is remarried. Ihave
been married twice, only Idon’t want anything to do with my
second wife.”)
But neither Dick’s physique nor the inky gallery adorning it
made as remarkable an impression as his face, which
seemed composed of mismatching parts. It was as though
his head had been halved like an apple, then put together a
fraction off center. Something of the kind had happened;
the imperfectly aligned features were the outcome of a car
collision in 1950—an accident that left his long-jawed and
narrow face tilted, the left side rather lower than the right,
with the results that the lips were slightly aslant, the nose
askew, and his eyes not only situated at uneven levels but
of uneven size, the left eye being truly serpentine, with a
venomous, sickly-blue squint that although it was
involuntarily acquired, seemed nevertheless to warn of
bitter sediment at the bottom of his nature. But Perry had
told him, “The eye doesn’t matter. Because you have a
wonderful smile. One of those smiles that really work.” It
was true that the tightening action of a smile contracted his
face into its correct proportions, and made it possible to
discern a less unnerving personality—an American-style
“good kid” with an outgrown crew cut, sane enough but not
too bright. (Actually, he was very intelligent. An I.Q. test
taken in prison gave him a rating of 130; the average
subject, in prison or out, scores between 90 and 110.)
Perry, too, had been maimed, and his injuries, received in
a motorcycle wreck, were severer than Dick’s; he had
spent half a year in a State of Washington hospital and
another six months on crutches, and though the accident
had occurred in 1952, his chunky, dwarfish legs, broken in
five places and pitifully scarred, still pained him so severely
that he had become an aspirin addict. While he had fewer
tattoos than his companion, they were more elaborate—not
the self-inflicted work of an amateur but epics of the art
contrived by Honolulu and Yokohama masters. COOKIE, the
name of a nurse who had been friendly to him when he was
hospitalized, was tattooed on his right biceps. Blue-furred,
orange-eyed, red-fanged, a tiger snarled upon his left
biceps; a spitting snake, coiled around a dagger, slithered
down his arm; and elsewhere skulls gleamed, a tombstone
loomed, a chrysanthemum flourished.
“O.K., beauty. Put away the comb,” said Dick, dressed now
and ready to go. Having discarded his work uniform, he
wore gray khakis, a matching shirt, and, like Perry, ankle-
high black boots. Perry, who could never find trousers to fit
his truncated lower half, wore blue jeans rolled up at the
bottom and a leather windbreaker. Scrubbed, combed, as
tidy as two dudes setting off on a double date, they went out
to the car.
The distance between Olathe, a suburb of Kansas City,
and Holcomb, which might be called a suburb of Garden
City, is approximately four hundred miles.
A town of eleven thousand, Garden City began assembling
its founders soon after the Civil War. An itinerant buffalo
hunter, Mr. C. J. (Buffalo) Jones, had much to do with its
subsequent expansion from a collection of huts and hitching
posts into an opulent ranching center with razzle-dazzle
saloons, an opera house, and the plushiest hotel anywhere
between Kansas City and Denver—in brief, a specimen of
frontier fanciness that rivaled a more famous settlement fifty
miles east of it, Dodge City. Along with Buffalo Jones, who
lost his money and then his mind (the last years of his life
were spent haranguing street groups against the wanton
extermination of the beasts he himself had so profitably
slaughtered), the glamours of the past are today entombed.
Some souvenirs exist; a moderately colorful row of
commercial buildings is known as the Buffalo Block, and
the once splendid Windsor Hotel, with its still splendid high-
ceilinged saloon and its atmosphere of spittoons and
potted palms, endures amid the variety stores and
supermarkets as a Main Street landmark—one
comparatively unpatronized, for the Windsor’s dark, huge
chambers and echoing hallways, evocative as they are,
cannot compete with the air-conditioned amenities offered
at the trim little Hotel Warren, or with the Wheat Lands
Motel’s individual television sets and “Heated Swimming
Pool.”
Anyone who has made the coast-to-coast journey across
America, whether by train or by car, has probably passed
through Garden City, but it is reasonable to assume that
few travelers remember the event. It seems just another
fair-sized town in the middle—almost the exact middle—of
the continental United States. Not that the inhabitants would
tolerate such an opinion—perhaps rightly. Though they may
overstate the case (“Look all over the world, and you won’t
find friendlier people or fresher air or sweeter drinking
water,” and “Icould go to Denver at triple the salary, but I’ve
got five kids, and Ifigure there’s no better place to raise
kids than right here. Swell schools with every kind of sport.
We even have a junior college,” and “Icame out here to
practice law. A temporary thing, Inever planned to stay. But
when the chance came to move, Ithought, Why go? What
the hell for? Maybe it’s not New York—but who wants New
York? Good neighbors, people who care about each other,
that’s what counts. And everything else a decent man
needs—we’ve got that, too. Beautiful churches. A golf
course”), the newcomer to Garden City, once he has
adjusted to the nightly after-eight silence of Main Street,
discovers much to support the defensive boastings of the
citizenry: a well-run public library, a competent daily
newspaper, green-lawned and shady squares here and
there, placid residential streets where animals and children
are safe to run free, a big, rambling park complete with a
small menagerie (“See the Polar Bears!” “See Penny the
Elephant!”), and a swimming pool that consumes several
acres (“World’s Largest FREE Swimpool!”). Such
accessories, and the dust and the winds and the ever-
calling train whistles, add up to a “home town” that is
probably remembered with nostalgia by those who have left
it, and that, for those who have remained, provides a sense
of roots and contentment.
Without exception, Garden Citians deny that the population
of the town can be socially graded (“No, sir. Nothing like
that here. All equal, regardless of wealth, color, or creed.
Everything the way it ought to be in a democracy; that’s
us”), but, of course, class distinctions are as clearly
observed, and as clearly observable, as in any other human
hive. A hundred miles west and one would be out of the
“Bible Belt,” that gospel-haunted strip of American territory
in which a man must, if only for business reasons, take his
religion with the straightest of faces, but in Finney County
one is still within the Bible Belt borders, and therefore a
person’s church affiliation is the most important factor
influencing his class status. A combination of Baptists,
Methodists, and Roman Catholics would account for eighty
percent of the county’s devout, yet among the elite—the
businessmen, bankers, lawyers, physicians, and more
prominent ranchers who tenant the top drawer—
Presbyterians and Episcopalians predominate. An
occasional Methodist is welcomed, and once in a while a
Democrat infiltrates, but on the whole the Establishment is
composed of rightwing Republicans of the Presbyterian
and Episcopalian faiths.
As an educated man successful in his profession, as an
eminent Republican and church leader—even though of the
Methodist church—Mr. Clutter was entitled to rank among
the local patricians, but just as he had never joined the
Garden City Country Club, he had never sought to
associate with the reigning coterie. Quite the contrary, for
their pleasures were not his; he had no use for card games,
golf, cocktails, or buffet suppers served at ten—or, indeed,
for any pastime that he felt did not “accomplish something.”
Which is why, instead of being part of a golfing foursome
on this shining Saturday, Mr. Clutter was acting as
chairman of a meeting of the Finney County 4-H Club. (4-H
stands for “Head, Heart, Hands, Health,” and the club motto
claims “We learn to do by doing.” It is a national
organization, with overseas branches, whose purpose is to
help those living in rural areas—and the children particularly
—develop practical abilities and moral character. Nancy
and Kenyon had been conscientious members from the
age of six.) Toward the end of the meeting, Mr. Clutter said,
“Now Ihave something to say concerning one of our adult
members.” His eyes singled out a chubby Japanese
woman surrounded by four chubby Japanese children. “You
all know Mrs. Hideo Ashida. Know how the Ashidas moved
here from Colorado—started farming out to Holcomb two
years ago. A fine family, the kind of people Holcomb’s lucky
to have. As anyone will tell you. Anyone who has been sick
and had Mrs. Ashida walk nobody can calculate how many
miles to bring them some of the wonderful soups she
makes. Or the flowers she grows where you wouldn’t
expect a flower could grow. And last year at the county fair
you will recall how much she contributed to the success of
the 4-H exhibits. So Iwant to suggest we honor Mrs. Ashida
with an award at our Achievement Banquet next Tuesday.”
Her children tugged at her, punched her; the oldest boy
shouted, “Hey, Ma, that’s you!” But Mrs. Ashida was
bashful; she rubbed her eyes with her baby-plump hands
and laughed. She was the wife of a tenant farmer; the farm,
an especially wind-swept and lonesome one, was halfway
between Garden City and Holcomb. After 4-H conferences,
Mr. Clutter usually drove the Ashidas home, and he did so
today.
“Gosh, that was a jolt,” said Mrs. Ashida as they rolled
along Route 50 in Mr. Clutter’s pickup truck. “Seems like
I’m always thanking you, Herb. But thanks.” She had met
him on her second day in Finney County; it was the day
before Halloween, and he and Kenyon had come to call,
bringing a load of pumpkins and squash. All through that
first hard year, gifts had arrived, of produce that the
Ashidas had not yet planted—baskets of asparagus,
lettuce. And Nancy often brought Babe by for the children to
ride. “You know, in most ways, this is the best place we’ve
ever lived. Hideo says the same. We sure hate to think
about leaving. Starting all over again.”
“Leaving?” protested Mr. Clutter, and slowed the car.
“Well, Herb. The farm here, the people we’re working for—
Hideo thinks we could do better. Maybe in Nebraska. But
nothing’s settled. It’s just talk so far.” Her hearty voice,
always on the verge of laughter, made the melancholy news
sound somehow cheerful, but seeing that she had
saddened Mr. Clutter, she turned to other matters. “Herb,
give me a man’s opinion,” she said. “Me and the kids,
we’ve been saving up, we want to give Hideo something on
the grand side for Christmas. What he needs is teeth. Now,
if your wife was to give you three gold teeth, would that
strike you as a wrong kind of present? Imean, asking a
man to spend Christmas in the dentist’s chair?”
“You beat all. Don’t ever try to get away from here. We’ll
hogtie you,” said Mr. Clutter. “Yes, yes, by all means gold
teeth. Was me, I’d be tickled.”
His reaction delighted Mrs. Ashida, for she knew he would
not approve her plan unless he meant it; he was a
gentleman. She had never known him to “act the Squire,” or
to take advantage or break a promise. She ventured to
obtain a promise now. “Look, Herb. At the banquet—no
speeches, huh? Not for me. You, you’re different. The way
you can stand up and talk to hundreds of people.
Thousands. And be so easy—convince anybody about
whatever. Just nothing scares you,” she said, commenting
upon a generally recognized quality of Mr. Clutter’s: a
fearless self-assurance that set him apart, and while it
created respect, also limited the affections of others a little.
“Ican’t imagine you afraid. No matter what happened, you’d
talk your way out of it.”
By midafternoon the black Chevrolet had reached
Emporia, Kansas—a large town, almost a city, and a safe
place, so the occupants of the car had decided, to do a bit
of shopping. They parked on a side street, then wandered
about until a suitably crowded variety store presented itself.
The first purchase was a pair of rubber gloves; these were
for Perry, who, unlike Dick, had neglected to bring old
gloves of his own.
They moved on to a counter displaying women’s hosiery.
After a spell of indecisive quibbling, Perry said, “I’m for it.”
Dick was not. “What about my eye? They’re all too light-
colored to hide that.”
“Miss,” said Perry, attracting a salesgirl’s attention. “You
got any black stockings?” When she told him no, he
proposed that they try another store. “Black’s foolproof.”
But Dick had made up his mind: stockings of any shade
were unnecessary, an encumbrance, a useless expense
(“I’ve already invested enough money in this operation”),
and, after all, anyone they encountered would not live to
bear witness. “No witnesses,” he reminded Perry, for what
seemed to Perry the millionth time. It rankled in him, the
way Dick mouthed those two words, as though they solved
every problem; it was stupid not to admit that there might
be a witness they hadn’t seen. “The ineffable happens,
things do take a turn,” he said. But Dick, smiling boastfully,
boyishly, did not agree: “Get the bubbles out of your blood.
Nothing can go wrong.” No. Because the plan was Dick’s,
and from first footfall to final silence, flawlessly devised.
Next they were interested in rope. Perry studied the stock,
tested it. Having once served in the Merchant Marine, he
understood rope and was clever with knots. He chose a
white nylon cord, as strong as wire and not much thicker.
They discussed how many yards of it they required. The
question irritated Dick, for it was part of a greater
quandary, and he could not, despite the alleged perfection
of his over-all design, be certain of the answer. Eventually,
he said, “Christ, how the hell should Iknow?”
“You damn well better.”
Dick tried. “There’s him. Her. The kid and the girl. And
maybe the other two. But it’s Saturday. They might have
guests. Let’s count on eight, or even twelve. The only sure
thing is every one of them has got to go.”
“Seems like a lot of it. To be so sure about.”
“Ain’t that what Ipromised you, honey—plenty of hair on
them-those walls?”
Perry shrugged. “Then we’d better buy the whole roll.”
It was a hundred yards long—quite enough for twelve.
Kenyon had built the chest himself: a mahogany hope
chest, lined with cedar, which he intended to give Beverly
as a wedding present. Now, working on it in the so-called
den in the basement, he applied a last coat of varnish. The
furniture of the den, a cement-floored room that ran the
length of the house, consisted almost entirely of examples
of his carpentry (shelves, tables, stools, a ping-pong table)
and Nancy’s needlework (chintz slip covers that rejuvenated
a decrepit couch, curtains, pillows bearing legends: HAPPY?
and YOU DON’T HAVE TO BE CRAZY TO LIVE HERE BUT IT HELPS).
Together, Kenyon and Nancy had made a paint-splattered
attempt to deprive the basement room of its unremovable
dourness, and neither was aware of failure. In fact, they
both thought their den a triumph and a blessing—Nancy
because it was a place where she could entertain “the
gang” without disturbing her mother, and Kenyon because
here he could be alone, free to bang, saw, and mess with
his “inventions,” the newest of which was an electric deep-
dish frying pan. Adjoining the den was a furnace room,
which contained a tool-littered table piled with some of his
other works-in-progress—an amplifying unit, an elderly
wind-up Victrola that he was restoring to service.
Kenyon resembled neither of his parents physically; his
crewcut hair was hemp-colored, and he was six feet tall and
lanky, though hefty enough to have once rescued a pair of
full-grown sheep by carrying them two miles through a
blizzard—sturdy, strong, but cursed with a lanky boy’s lack
of muscular coordination. This defect, aggravated by an
inability to function without glasses, prevented him from
taking more than a token part in those team sports
(basketball, baseball) that were the main occupation of
most of the boys who might have been his friends. He had
only one close friend—Bob Jones, the son of Taylor Jones,
whose ranch was a mile west of the Clutter home. Out in
rural Kansas, boys start driving cars very young; Kenyon
was eleven when his father allowed him to buy, with money
he had earned raising sheep, an old truck with a Model A
engine—the Coyote Wagon, he and Bob called it. Not far
from River Valley Farm there is a mysterious stretch of
countryside known as the Sand Hills; it is like a beach
without an ocean, and at night coyotes slink among the
dunes, assembling in hordes to howl. On moonlit evenings
the boys would descend upon them, set them running, and
try to outrace them in the wagon; they seldom did, for the
scrawniest coyote can hit fifty miles an hour, whereas the
wagon’s top speed was thirty-five, but it was a wild and
beautiful kind of fun, the wagon skidding across the sand,
the fleeing coyotes framed against the moon—as Bob
said, it sure made your heart hurry.
Equally intoxicating, and more profitable, were the rabbit
roundups the two boys conducted: Kenyon was a good shot
and his friend a better one, and between them they
sometimes delivered half a hundred rabbits to the “rabbit
factory”—a Garden City processing plant that paid ten
cents a head for the animals, which were then quick-frozen
and shipped to mink growers. But what meant most to
Kenyon—and Bob, too—was their weekend, overnight
hunting hikes along the shores of the river: wandering,
wrapping up in blankets, listening at sunrise for the noise of
wings, moving toward the sound on tiptoe, and then,
sweetest of all, swaggering homeward with a dozen duck
dinners swinging from their belts. But lately things had
changed between Kenyon and his friend. They had not
quarreled, there had been no overt falling-out, nothing had
happened except that Bob, who was sixteen, had started
“going with a girl,” which meant that Kenyon, a year younger
and still very much the adolescent bachelor, could no longer
count on his companionship. Bob told him, “When you’re
my age, you’ll feel different. Iused to think the same as you:
Women—so what? But then you get to talking to some
woman, and it’s mighty nice. You’ll see.” Kenyon doubted it;
he could not conceive of ever wanting to waste an hour on
any girl that might be spent with guns, horses, tools,
machinery, even a book. If Bob was unavailable, then he
would rather be alone, for in temperament he was not in the
least Mr. Clutter’s son but rather Bonnie’s child, a sensitive
and reticent boy. His contemporaries thought him “stand-
offish,” yet forgave him, saying, “Oh, Kenyon. It’s just that he
lives in a world of his own.”
Leaving the varnish to dry, he went on to another chore—
one that took him out-of-doors. He wanted to tidy up his
mother’s flower garden, a treasured patch of disheveled
foliage that grew beneath her bedroom window. When he
got there, he found one of the hired men loosening earth
with a spade—Paul Helm, the husband of the housekeeper.
“Seen that car?” Mr. Helm asked.
Yes, Kenyon had seen a car in the driveway—a gray Buick,
standing outside the entrance to his father’s office.
“Thought you might know who it was.”
“Not unless it’s Mr. Johnson. Dad said he was expecting
him.”
Mr. Helm (the late Mr. Helm; he died of a stroke the
following March) was a somber man in his late fifties whose
withdrawn manner veiled a nature keenly curious and
watchful; he liked to know what was going on. “Which
Johnson?”
“The insurance fellow.”
Mr. Helm grunted. “Your dad must be laying in a stack of it.
That car’s been here I’d say three hours.”
The chill of oncoming dusk shivered through the air, and
though the sky was still deep blue, lengthening shadows
emanated from the garden’s tall chrysanthemum stalks;
Nancy’s cat frolicked among them, catching its paws in the
twine with which Kenyon and the old man were now tying
plants. Suddenly, Nancy herself came jogging across the
fields aboard fat Babe—Babe, returning from her Saturday
treat, a bathe in the river. Teddy, the dog, accompanied
them, and all three were water-splashed and shining.
“You’ll catch cold,” Mr. Helm said.
Nancy laughed; she had never been ill—not once. Sliding
off Babe, she sprawled on the grass at the edge of the
garden and seized her cat, dangled him above her, and
kissed his nose and whiskers.
Kenyon was disgusted. “Kissing animals on the mouth.”
“You used to kiss Skeeter,” she reminded him.
“Skeeter was a horse.” A beautiful horse, a strawberry
stallion he had raised from a foal. How that Skeeter could
take a fence! “You use a horse too hard,” his father had
cautioned him. “One day you’ll ride the life out of Skeeter.”
And he had; while Skeeter was streaking down a road with
his master astride him, his heart failed, and he stumbled
and was dead. Now, a year later, Kenyon still mourned him,
even though his father, taking pity on him, had promised
him the pick of next spring’s foals.
“Kenyon?” Nancy said. “Do you think Tracy will be able to
talk? By Thanksgiving?” Tracy, not yet a year old, was her
nephew, the son of Eveanna, the sister to whom she felt
particularly close. (Beverly was Kenyon’s favorite.) “It would
thrill me to pieces to hear him say ‘Aunt Nancy.’ Or ‘Uncle
Kenyon.’ Wouldn’t you like to hear him say that? Imean,
don’t you love being an uncle? Kenyon? Good grief, why
can’t you ever answer me?”
“Because you’re silly,” he said, tossing her the head of a
flower, a wilted dahlia, which she jammed into her hair.
Mr. Helm picked up his spade. Crows cawed, sundown
was near, but his home was not; the lane of Chinese elms
had turned into a tunnel of darkening green, and he lived at
the end of it, half a mile away. “Evening,” he said, and
started his journey. But once he looked back. “And that,” he
was to testify the next day, “was the last Iseen them. Nancy
leading old Babe off to the barn. Like Isaid, nothing out of
the ordinary.”
The black Chevrolet was again parked, this time in front of
a Catholic hospital on the outskirts of Emporia. Under
continued needling (“That’s your trouble. You think there’s
only one right way—Dick’s way”), Dick had surrendered.
While Perry waited in the car, he had gone into the hospital
to try and buy a pair of black stockings from a nun. This
rather unorthodox method of obtaining them had been
Perry’s inspiration; nuns, he had argued, were certain to
have a supply. The notion presented one drawback, of
course: nuns, and anything pertaining to them, were bad
luck, and Perry was most respectful of his superstitions.
(Some others were the number 15, red hair, white flowers,
priests crossing a road, snakes appearing in a dream.)
Still, it couldn’t be helped. The compulsively superstitious
person is also very often a serious believer in fate; that was
the case with Perry. He was here, and embarked on the
present errand, not because he wished to be but because
fate had arranged the matter; he could prove it—though he
had no intention of doing so, at least within Dick’s hearing,
for the proof would involve his confessing the true and
secret motive behind his return to Kansas, a piece of
parole violation he had decided upon for a reason quite
unrelated to Dick’s “score” or Dick’s summoning letter. The
reason was that several weeks earlier he had learned that
on Thursday, November 12, another of his former cellmates
was being released from Kansas State Penitentiary at
Lansing, and “more than anything in the world,” he desired
a reunion with this man, his “real and only friend,” the
“brilliant” Willie-Jay.
During the first of his three years in prison, Perry had
observed Willie-Jay from a distance, with interest but with
apprehension; if one wished to be thought a tough
specimen, intimacy with Willie-Jay seemed unwise. He was
the chaplain’s clerk, a slender Irishman with prematurely
gray hair and gray, melancholy eyes. His tenor voice was
the glory of the prison’s choir. Even Perry, though he was
contemptuous of any exhibition of piety, felt “upset” when he
heard Willie-Jay sing “The Lord’s Prayer”; the hymn’s grave
language sung in so credulous a spirit moved him, made
him wonder a little at the justice of his contempt. Eventually,
prodded by a slightly alerted religious curiosity, he
approached Willie-Jay, and the chaplain’s clerk, at once
responsive, thought he divined in the cripple-legged body
builder with the misty gaze and the prim, smoky voice “a
poet, something rare and savable.” An ambition to “bring
this boy to God” engulfed him. His hopes of succeeding
accelerated when one day Perry produced a pastel
drawing he had made—a large, in no way technically naïve
portrait of Jesus. Lansing’s Protestant chaplain, the
Reverend James Post, so valued it that he hung it in his
office, where it hangs still: a slick and pretty Saviour, with
Willie-Jay’s full lips and grieving eyes. The picture was the
climax of Perry’s never very earnest spiritual quest, and,
ironically, the termination of it; he adjudged his Jesus “a
piece of hypocrisy,” an attempt to “fool and betray” Willie-
Jay, for he was as unconvinced of God as ever. Yet should
he admit this and risk forfeiting the one friend who had ever
“truly understood” him? (Hod, Joe, Jesse, travelers straying
through a world where last names were seldom exchanged,
these had been his “buddies”—never anyone like Willie-
Jay, who was in Perry’s opinion, “way above average
intellectually, perceptive as a well-trained psychologist.”
How was it possible that so gifted a man had wound up in
Lansing? That was what amazed Perry. The answer, which
he knew but rejected as “an evasion of the deeper, the
human question,” was plain to simpler minds: the chaplain’s
clerk, then thirty-eight, was a thief, a small-scale robber who
over a period of twenty years had served sentences in five
different states.) Perry decided to speak out: he was sorry,
but it was not for him—heaven, hell, saints, divine mercy—
and if Willie-Jay’s affection was founded on the prospect of
Perry’s some day joining him at the foot of the Cross, then
he was deceived and their friendship false, a counterfeit,
like the portrait.
As usual, Willie-Jay understood; disheartened but not
disenchanted, he had persisted in courting Perry’s soul until
the day of its possessor’s parole and departure, on the eve
of which he wrote Perry a farewell letter, whose last
paragraph ran: “You are a man of extreme passion, a
hungry man not quite sure where his appetite lies, a deeply
frustrated man striving to project his individuality against a
backdrop of rigid conformity. You exist in a half-world
suspended between two superstructures, one self-
expression and the other self-destruction. You are strong,
but there is a flaw in your strength, and unless you learn to
control it the flaw will prove stronger than your strength and
defeat you. The flaw? Explosive emotional reaction out of
all proportion to the occasion. Why? Why this
unreasonable anger at the sight of others who are happy or
content, this growing contempt for people and the desire to
hurt them? All right, you think they’re fools, you despise
them because their morals, their happiness is the source of
your frustration and resentment. But these are dreadful
enemies you carry within yourself—in time destructive as
bullets. Mercifully, a bullet kills its victim. This other bacteria,
permitted to age, does not kill a man but leaves in its wake
the hulk of a creature torn and twisted; there is still fire
within his being but it is kept alive by casting upon it
faggots of scorn and hate. He may successfully
accumulate, but he does not accumulate success, for he is
his own enemy and is kept from truly enjoying his
achievements.”
Perry, flattered to be the subject of this sermon, had let
Dick read it, and Dick, who took a dim view of Willie-Jay,
had called the letter “just more of Billy Grahamcracker’s
hooey,” adding, “ ‘Faggots of scorn!’ He’s the faggot.” Of
course, Perry had expected this reaction, and secretly he
welcomed it, for his friendship with Dick, whom he had
scarcely known until his final few months in Lansing, was an
outgrowth of, and counterbalance to, the intensity of his
admiration for the chaplain’s clerk. Perhaps Dick was
“shallow,” or even, as Willie-Jay claimed, “a vicious
blusterer.” All the same, Dick was full of fun, and he was
shrewd, a realist, he “cut through things,” there were no
clouds in his head or straw in his hair. Moreover, unlike
Willie-Jay, he was not critical of Perry’s exotic aspirations;
he was willing to listen, catch fire, share with him those
visions of “guaranteed treasure” lurking in Mexican seas,
Brazilian jungles.
After Perry’s parole, four months elapsed, months of rattling
around in a fifth-hand, hundred-dollar Ford, rolling from
Reno to Las Vegas, from Bellingham, Washington, to Buhl,
Idaho, and it was in Buhl, where he had found temporary
work as a truck driver, that Dick’s letter reached him:
“Friend P., Came out in August, and after you left IMet
Someone, you do not know him, but he put me on to
Something we could bring off Beautiful. A cinch, the Perfect
score . . .” Until then Perry had not imagined that he would
ever see Dick again. Or Willie-Jay. But they had both been
much in his thoughts, and especially the latter, who in
memory had grown ten feet tall, a gray-haired wise man
haunting the hallways of his mind. “You pursue the
negative,” Willie-Jay had informed him once, in one of his
lectures. “You want not to give a damn, to exist without
responsibility, without faith or friends or warmth.”
In the solitary, comfortless course of his recent driftings,
Perry had over and over again reviewed this indictment,
and had decided it was unjust. He did give a damn—but
who had ever given a damn about him? His father? Yes, up
to a point. A girl or two—but that was “a long story.” No one
else except Willie-Jay himself. And only Willie-Jay had ever
recognized his worth, his potentialities, had acknowledged
that he was not just an undersized, overmuscled half-breed,
had seen him, for all the moralizing, as he saw himself
—“exceptional,” “rare,” “artistic.” In Willie-Jay his vanity had
found support, his sensibility shelter, and the four-month
exile from this high-carat appreciation had made it more
alluring than any dream of buried gold. So when he
received Dick’s invitation, and realized that the date Dick
proposed for his coming to Kansas more or less coincided
with the time of Willie-Jay’s release, he knew what he must
do. He drove to Las Vegas, sold his junk-heap car, packed
his collection of maps, old letters, manuscripts, and books,
and bought a ticket for a Greyhound bus. The journey’s
aftermath was up to fate; if things didn’t “work out with
Willie-Jay,” then he might “consider Dick’s proposition.” As
it turned out, the choice was between Dick and nothing, for
when Perry’s bus reached Kansas City, on the evening of
November 12, Willie-Jay, whom he’d been unable to advise
of his coming, had already left town-left, in fact, only five
hours earlier, from the same terminal at which Perry
arrived. That much he had learned by telephoning the
Reverend Mr. Post, who further discouraged him by
declining to reveal his former clerk’s exact destination.
“He’s headed East,” the chaplain said. “To fine
opportunities. A decent job, and a home with some good
people who are willing to help him.” And Perry, hanging up,
had felt “dizzy with anger and disappointment.”
But what, he wondered when the anguish subsided, had he
really expected from a reunion with Willie-Jay? Freedom
had separated them; as free men, they had nothing in
common, were opposites, who could never have formed a
“team”—certainly not one capable of embarking on the
skin-diving south-of-the-border adventures he and Dick had
plotted. Nevertheless, if he had not missed Willie-Jay, if
they could have been together for even an hour, Perry was
quite convinced—just “knew”—that he would not now be
loitering outside a hospital waiting for Dick to emerge with
a pair of black stockings.
Dick returned empty-handed. “No go,” he announced, with
a furtive casualness that made Perry suspicious.
“Are you sure? Sure you even asked?”
“Sure Idid.”
“Idon’t believe you. Ithink you went in there, hung around a
couple of minutes, and came out.”
“O.K., sugar—whatever you say.” Dick started the car. After
they had traveled in silence awhile, Dick patted Perry on
the knee. “Aw, come on,” he said. “It was a puky idea. What
the hell would they have thought? Me barging in there like it
was a goddam five-’n’-dime . . .”
Perry said, “Maybe it’s just as well. Nuns are a bad-luck
bunch.”
The Garden City representative of New York Life Insurance
smiled as he watched Mr. Clutter uncap a Parker pen and
open a checkbook. He was reminded of a local jest: “Know
what they say about you, Herb? Say, ‘Since haircuts went to
a dollar-fifty, Herb writes the barber a check.’ ”
“That’s correct,” replied Mr. Clutter. Like royalty, he was
famous for never carrying cash. “That’s the way Ido
business. When those tax fellows come poking around,
canceled checks are your best friend.”
With the check written but not yet signed, he swiveled back
in his desk chair and seemed to ponder. The agent, a
stocky, somewhat bald, rather informal man named Bob
Johnson, hoped his client wasn’t having last-minute doubts.
Herb was hardheaded, a slow man to make a deal;
Johnson had worked over a year to clinch this sale. But, no,
his customer was merely experiencing what Johnson called
the Solemn Moment—a phenomenon familiar to insurance
salesmen. The mood of a man insuring his life is not unlike
that of a man signing his will; thoughts of mortality must
occur.
“Yes, yes,” said Mr. Clutter, as though conversing with
himself. “I’ve plenty to be grateful for—wonderful things in
my life.” Framed documents commemorating milestones in
his career gleamed against the walnut walls of his office: a
college diploma, a map of River Valley Farm, agricultural
awards, an ornate certificate bearing the signatures of
Dwight D. Eisenhower and John Foster Dulles, which cited
his services to the Federal Farm Credit Board. “The kids.
We’ve been lucky there. Shouldn’t say it, but I’m real proud
of them. Take Kenyon. Right now he kind of leans toward
being an engineer, or a scientist, but you can’t tell me my
boy’s not a born rancher. God willing, he’ll run this place
some day. You ever met Eveanna’s husband? Don
Jarchow? Veterinarian. Ican’t tell you how much Ithink of
that boy. Vere, too. Vere English—the boy my girl Beverly
had the good sense to settle on. If anything ever happened
to me, I’m sure Icould trust those fellows to take
responsibility; Bonnie by herself—Bonnie wouldn’t be able
to carry on an operation like this . . .”
Johnson, a veteran at listening to ruminations of this sort,
knew it was time to intervene. “Why, Herb,” he said. “You’re
a young man. Forty-eight. And from the looks of you, from
what the medical report tells us, we’re likely to have you
around a couple of weeks more.”
Mr. Clutter straightened, reached again for his pen. “Tell the
truth, Ifeel pretty good. And pretty optimistic. I’ve got an
idea a man could make some real money around here the
next few years.” While outlining his schemes for future
financial betterment, he signed the check and pushed it
across his desk.
The time was ten past six, and the agent was anxious to go;
his wife would be waiting supper. “It’s been a pleasure,
Herb.”
“Same here, fellow.”
They shook hands. Then, with a merited sense of victory,
Johnson picked up Mr. Clutter’s check and deposited it in
his billfold. It was the first payment on a forty-thousand-
dollar policy that in the event of death by accidental means,
paid double indemnity.
“And He walkswith me, and He talkswith me,
And He tells me Iam His own,
And the joy we share as we tarry there,
None other has ever known . . .”
With the aid of his guitar, Perry had sung himself into a
happier humor. He knew the lyrics of some two hundred
hymns and ballads—a repertoire ranging from “The Old
Rugged Cross” to Cole Porter—and, in addition to the
guitar, he could play the harmonica, the accordion, the
banjo, and the xylophone. In one of his favorite theatrical
fantasies, his stage name was Perry O’Parsons, a star who
billed himself as “The One-Man Symphony.”
Dick said, “How about a cocktail?”
Personally, Perry didn’t care what he drank, for he was not
much of a drinker. Dick, however, was choosy, and in bars
his usual choice was an Orange Blossom. From the car’s
glove compartment Perry fetched a pint bottle containing a
ready-mixed compound of orange flavoring and vodka.
They passed the bottle to and fro. Though dusk had
established itself, Dick, doing a steady sixty miles an hour,
was still driving without headlights, but then the road was
straight, the country was as level as a lake, and other cars
were seldom sighted. This was “out there”—or getting near
it.
“Christ!” said Perry, glaring at the landscape, flat and
limitless under the sky’s cold, lingering green—empty and
lonesome except for the far-between flickerings of
farmhouse lights. He hated it, as he hated the Texas plains,
the Nevada desert; spaces horizontal and sparsely
inhabited had always induced in him a depression
accompanied by agoraphobic sensations. Seaports were
his heart’s delight—crowded, clanging, ship-clogged,
sewage-scented cities, like Yokohama, where as an
American Army private he’d spent a summer during the
Korean War. “Christ—and they told me to keep away from
Kansas! Never set my pretty foot here again. As though
they were barring me from heaven. And just look at it. Just
feast your eyes.”
Dick handed him the bottle, the contents reduced by half.
“Save the rest,” Dick said. “We may need it.”
“Remember, Dick? All that talk about getting a boat? Iwas
thinking—we could buy a boat in Mexico. Something cheap
but sturdy. And we could go to Japan. Sail right across the
Pacific. It’s been done—thousands of people have done it.
I’m not conning you, Dick—you’d go for Japan. Wonderful,
gentle people, with manners like flowers. Really
considerate—not just out for your dough. And the women.
You’ve never met a real woman . . .”
“Yes, Ihave,” said Dick, who claimed still to be in love with
his honey-blond first wife though she had remarried.
“There are these baths. One place called the Dream Pool.
You stretch out, and beautiful knockout-type girls come and
scrub you head to toe.”
“You told me.” Dick’s tone was curt.
“So? Can’t Irepeat myself?”
“Later. Let’s talk about it later. Hell, man, I’ve got plenty on
my mind.”
Dick switched on the radio; Perry switched it off. Ignoring
Dick’s protest, he strummed his guitar:
“Icame to the garden alone, while the dew was still on the
roses,
And the voice Ihear, falling on my ear,
The Son of God discloses . . .”
A full moon was forming at the edge of the sky.
The following Monday, while giving evidence prior to taking
a lie-detector test, young Bobby Rupp described his last
visit to the Clutter home: “There was a full moon, and I
thought maybe, if Nancy wanted to, we might go for a drive
—drive out to McKinney Lake. Or go to the movies in
Garden City. But when Icalled her—it must have been
about ten of seven—she said she’d have to ask her father.
Then she came back, and said the answer was no—
because we’d stayed out so late the night before. But said
why didn’t Icome over and watch television. I’ve spent a lot
of time at the Clutters’ watching television. See, Nancy’s
the only girl Iever dated. I’d known her all my life; we’d gone
to school together from the first grade. Always, as long as I
can remember, she was pretty and popular—a person,
even when she was a little kid. Imean, she just made
everybody feel good about themselves. The first time I
dated her was when we were in the eighth grade. Most of
the boys in our class wanted to take her to the eighth-grade
graduation dance, and Iwas surprised—Iwas pretty proud
—when she said she would go with me. We were both
twelve. My dad lent me the car, and Idrove her to the
dance. The more Isaw her, the more Iliked her; the whole
family, too—there wasn’t any other family like them, not
around here, not that Iknow of. Mr. Clutter may have been
more strict about some things—religion, and so on—but he
never tried to make you feel he was right and you were
wrong.
“We live three miles west of the Clutter place. Iused to walk
it back and forth, but Ialways worked summers, and last
year I’d saved enough to buy my own car, a ’55 Ford. So I
drove over there, got there a little after seven. Ididn’t see
anybody on the road or on the lane that leads up to the
house, or anybody outside. Just old Teddy. He barked at
me. The lights were on downstairs—in the living room and
in Mr. Clutter’s office. The second floor was dark, and I
figured Mrs. Clutter must be asleep—if she was home. You
never knew whether she was or not, and Inever asked. But I
found out Iwas right, because later in the evening Kenyon
wanted to practice his horn, he played baritone horn in the
school band—and Nancy told him not to, because he would
wake up Mrs. Clutter. Anyway, when Igot there they had
finished supper and Nancy had cleaned up, put all the
dishes in the dishwasher, and the three of them—the two
kids and Mr. Clutter—were in the living room. So we sat
around like any other night—Nancy and Ion the couch, and
Mr. Clutter in his chair, that stuffed rocker. He wasn’t
watching the television so much as he was reading a book
—a ‘Rover Boy,’ one of Kenyon’s books. Once he went out
to the kitchen and came back with two apples; he offered
one to me, but Ididn’t want it, so he ate them both. He had
very white teeth; he said apples were why. Nancy—Nancy
was wearing socks and soft slippers, blue jeans, Ithink a
green sweater; she was wearing a gold wristwatch and an
I.D. bracelet Igave her last January for her sixteenth
birthday—with her name on one side and mine on the other
—and she had on a ring, some little silver thing she bought
a summer ago, when she went to Colorado with the
Kidwells. It wasn’t my ring—our ring. See, a couple of
weeks back she got sore at me and said she was going to
take off our ring for a while. When your girl does that, it
means you’re on probation. Imean, sure, we had fusses—
everybody does, all the kids that go steady. What
happened was Iwent to this friend’s wedding, the
reception, and drank a beer, one bottle of beer, and Nancy
got to hear about it. Some tattle told her Iwas roaring
drunk. Well, she was stone, wouldn’t say hello for a week.
But lately we’d been getting on good as ever, and Ibelieve
she was about ready to wear our ring again.
“O.K. The first show was called ‘The Man and the
Challenge.’ Channel 11. About some fellows in the Arctic.
Then we saw a Western, and after that a spy adventure
—‘Five Fingers.’ ‘Mike Hammer’ came on at nine-thirty.
Then the news. But Kenyon didn’t like anything, mostly
because we wouldn’t let him pick the programs. He
criticized everything and Nancy kept telling him to hush up.
They always quibbled, but actually they were very close—
closer than most brothers and sisters. Iguess partly it was
because they’d been alone together so much, what with
Mrs. Clutter away and Mr. Clutter gone to Washington, or
wherever. Iknow Nancy loved Kenyon very specially, but I
don’t think even she, or anybody, exactly understood him.
He seemed to be off somewhere. You never knew what he
was thinking, never even knew if he was looking at you—on
account of he was slightly cockeyed. Some people said he
was a genius, and maybe it was true. He sure did read a
lot. But, like Isay, he was restless; he didn’t want to watch
the TV, he wanted to practice his horn, and when Nancy
wouldn’t let him, Iremember Mr. Clutter told him why didn’t
he go down to the basement, the recreation room, where
nobody could hear him. But he didn’t want to do that, either.
“The phone rang once. Twice? Gosh, Ican’t remember.
Except that once the phone rang and Mr. Clutter answered
it in his office. The door was open—that sliding door
between the living room and the office—and Iheard him
say ‘Van,’ so Iknew he was talking to his partner, Mr. Van
Vleet, and Iheard him say that he had a headache but that
it was getting better. And said he’d see Mr. Van Vleet on
Monday. When he came back—yes, the Mike Hammer was
just over. Five minutes of news. Then the weather report.
Mr. Clutter always perked up when the weather report came
on. It’s all he ever really waited for. Like the only thing that
interested me was the sports—which came on next. After
the sports ended, that was ten-thirty, and Igot up to go.
Nancy walked me out. We talked a while, and made a date
to go to the movies Sunday night—a picture all the girls
were looking forward to, Blue Denim. Then she ran back in
the house, and Idrove away. It was as clear as day—the
moon was so bright—and cold and kind of windy; a lot of
tumbleweed blowing about. But that’s all Isaw. Only now
when Ithink back, Ithink somebody must have been hiding
there. Maybe down among the trees. Somebody just
waiting for me to leave.”
The travelers stopped for dinner at a restaurant in Great
Bend. Perry, down to his last fifteen dollars, was ready to
settle for root beer and a sandwich, but Dick said no, they
needed a solid “tuck-in,” and never mind the cost, the tab
was his. They ordered two steaks medium rare, baked
potatoes, French fries, fried onions, succotash, side dishes
of macaroni and hominy, salad with Thousand Island
dressing, cinnamon rolls, apple pie and ice cream, and
coffee. To top it off, they visited a drugstore and selected
cigars; in the same drugstore, they also bought two thick
rolls of adhesive tape.
As the black Chevrolet regained the highway and hurried
on across a countryside imperceptibly ascending toward
the colder, cracker-dry climate of the high wheat plains,
Perry closed his eyes and dozed off into a food-dazed
semi-slumber, from which he woke to hear a voice reading
the eleven-o’clock news. He rolled down a window and
bathed his face in the flood of frosty air. Dick told him they
were in Finney County. “We crossed the line ten miles
back,” he said. The car was going very fast. Signs, their
messages ignited by the car’s headlights, flared up, flew
by: “See the Polar Bears,” “Burtis Motors,” “World’s Largest
FREE Swimpool,” “Wheat Lands Motel,” and, finally, a bit
before street lamps began, “Howdy, Stranger! Welcome to
Garden City. A Friendly Place.”
They skirted the northern rim of the town. No one was
abroad at this nearly midnight hour, and nothing was open
except a string of desolately brilliant service stations. Dick
turned into one—Hurd’s Phillips 66. A youngster appeared,
and asked, “Fill her up?” Dick nodded, and Perry, getting
out of the car, went inside the station, where he locked
himself in the men’s room. His legs pained him, as they
often did; they hurt as though his old accident had
happened five minutes before. He shook three aspirins out
of a bottle, chewed them slowly (for he liked the taste), and
then drank water from the basin tap. He sat down on the
toilet, stretched out his legs and rubbed them, massaging
the almost unbendable knees. Dick had said they were
almost there—“only seven miles more.” He unzippered a
pocket of his windbreaker and brought out a paper sack;
inside it were the recently purchased rubber gloves. They
were glue-covered, sticky and thin, and as he inched them
on, one tore—not a dangerous tear, just a split between the
fingers, but it seemed to him an omen.
The doorknob turned, rattled. Dick said, “Want some
candy? They got a candy machine out here.”
“No.”
“You O.K.?”
“I’m fine.”
“Don’t be all night.”
Dick dropped a dime in a vending machine, pulled the
lever, and picked up a bag of jelly beans; munching, he
wandered back to the car and lounged there watching the
young attendant’s efforts to rid the windshield of Kansas
dust and the slime of battered insects. The attendant,
whose name was James Spor, felt uneasy. Dick’s eyes
and sullen expression and Perry’s strange, prolonged
sojourn in the lavatory disturbed him. (The next day he
reported to his employer, “We had some tough customers
in here last night,” but he did not think, then or for the
longest while, to connect the visitors with the tragedy in
Holcomb.)
Dick said, “Kind of slow around here.”
“Sure is,” James Spor said. “You’re the only body stopped
here since two hours. Where you coming from?”
“Kansas City.”
“Here to hunt?”
“Just passing through. On our way to Arizona. We got jobs
waiting there. Construction work. Any idea the mileage
between here and Tucumcari, New Mexico?”
“Can’t say Ido. Three dollars six cents.” He accepted
Dick’s money, made change, and said, “You’ll excuse me,
sir? I’m doing a job. Putting a bumper on a truck.”
Dick waited, ate some jelly beans, impatiently gunned the
motor, sounded the horn. Was it possible that he had
misjudged Perry’s character? That Perry, of all people, was
suffering a sudden case of “blood bubbles”? A year ago,
when they first encountered each other, he’d thought Perry
“a good guy,” if a bit “stuck on himself,” “sentimental,” too
much “the dreamer.” He had liked him but not considered
him especially worth cultivating until, one day, Perry
described a murder, telling how, simply for “the hell of it,” he
had killed a colored man in Las Vegas—beaten him to
death with a bicycle chain. The anecdote elevated Dick’s
opinion of Little Perry; he began to see more of him, and,
like Willie-Jay, though for dissimilar reasons, gradually
decided that Perry possessed unusual and valuable
qualities. Several murderers, or men who boasted of
murder or their willingness to commit it, circulated inside
Lansing; but Dick became convinced that Perry was that
rarity, “a natural killer”—absolutely sane, but
conscienceless, and capable of dealing, with or without
motive, the coldest-blooded deathblows. It was Dick’s
theory that such a gift could, under his supervision, be
profitably exploited. Having reached this conclusion, he had
proceeded to woo Perry, flatter him—pretend, for example,
that he believed all the buried-treasure stuff and shared his
beachcomber yearnings and seaport longings, none of
which appealed to Dick, who wanted “a regular life,” with a
business of his own, a house, a horse to ride, a new car,
and “plenty of blond chicken.” It was important, however,
that Perry not suspect this—not until Perry, with his gift, had
helped further Dick’s ambitions. But perhaps it was Dick
who had miscalculated, been duped; if so—if it developed
that Perry was, after all, only an “ordinary punk”—then “the
party” was over, the months of planning were wasted, there
was nothing to do but turn and go. It mustn’t happen; Dick
returned to the station.
The door to the men’s room was still bolted. He banged on
it: “For Christsake, Perry!”
“In a minute.”
“What’s the matter? You sick?”
Perry gripped the edge of the washbasin and hauled
himself to a standing position. His legs trembled; the pain
in his knees made him perspire. He wiped his face with a
paper towel. He unlocked the door and said, “O.K. Let’s
go.”
Nancy’s bedroom was the smallest, most personal room in
the house—girlish, and as frothy as a ballerina’s tutu. Walls,
ceiling, and everything else except a bureau and a writing
desk, were pink or blue or white. The white-and-pink bed,
piled with blue pillows, was dominated by a big pink-and-
white Teddy bear—a shooting-gallery prize that Bobby had
won at the county fair. A cork bulletin board, painted pink,
hung above a white-skirted dressing table; dry gardenias,
the remains of some ancient corsage, were attached to it,
and old valentines, newspaper recipes, and snapshots of
her baby nephew and of Susan Kidwell and of Bobby Rupp,
Bobby caught in a dozen actions—swinging a bat, dribbling
a basketball, driving a tractor, wading, in bathing trunks, at
the edge of McKinney Lake (which was as far as he dared
go, for he had never learned to swim). And there were
photographs of the two together—Nancy and Bobby. Of
these, she liked best one that showed them sitting in a leaf-
dappled light amid picnic debris and looking at one another
with expressions that, though unsmiling, seemed mirthful
and full of delight. Other pictures, of horses, of cats
deceased but unforgotten—like “poor Boobs,” who had
died not long ago and most mysteriously (she suspected
poison)—encumbered her desk.
Nancy was invariably the last of the family to retire; as she
had once informed her friend and home-economics
teacher, Mrs. Polly Stringer, the midnight hours were her
“time to be selfish and vain.” It was then that she went
through her beauty routine, a cleansing, creaming ritual,
which on Saturday nights included washing her hair.
Tonight, having dried and brushed her hair and bound it in a
gauzy bandanna, she set out the clothes she intended to
wear to church the next morning: nylons, black pumps, a red
velveteen dress—her prettiest, which she herself had
made. It was the dress in which she was to be buried.
Before saying her prayers, she always recorded in a diary
a few occurrences (“Summer here. Forever, Ihope. Sue
over and we rode Babe down to the river. Sue played her
flute. Fireflies”) and an occasional outburst (“Ilove him, I
do”). It was a five-year diary; in the four years of its
existence she had never neglected to make an entry,
though the splendor of several events (Eveanna’s wedding,
the birth of her nephew) and the drama of others (her “first
REAL quarrel with Bobby”—a page literally tear-stained)
had caused her to usurp space allotted to the future. A
different-tinted ink identified each year: 1956 was green
and 1957 a ribbon of red, replaced the following year by
bright lavender, and now, in 1959, she had decided upon a
dignified blue. But as in every manifestation, she continued
to tinker with her handwriting, slanting it to the right or to the
left, shaping it roundly or steeply, loosely or stingily—as
though she were asking, “Is this Nancy? Or that? Or that?
Which is me?” (Once Mrs. Riggs, her English teacher, had
returned a theme with a scribbled comment: “Good. But
why written in three styles of script?” To which Nancy had
replied: “Because I’m not grown-up enough to be one
person with one kind of signature.”) Still, she had
progressed in recent months, and it was in a handwriting of
emerging maturity that she wrote, “Jolene K. came over
and Ishowed her how to make a cherry pie. Practiced with
Roxie. Bobby here and we watched TV. Left at eleven.”
“This is it, this is it, this has to be it, there’s the school,
there’s the garage, now we turn south.” To Perry, it seemed
as though Dick were muttering jubilant mumbo-jumbo. They
left the highway, sped through a deserted Holcomb, and
crossed the Santa Fe tracks. “The bank, that must be the
bank, now we turn west—see the trees? This is it, this has
to be it.” The headlights disclosed a lane of Chinese elms;
bundles of wind-blown thistle scurried across it. Dick
doused the headlights, slowed down, and stopped until his
eyes were adjusted to the moon-illuminated night.
Presently, the car crept forward.
Holcomb is twelve miles east of the mountain time-zone
border, a circumstance that causes some grumbling, for it
means that at seven in the morning, and in winter at eight or
after, the sky is still dark and the stars, if any, are still
shining—as they were when the two sons of Vic Irsik
arrived to do their Sunday-morning chores. But by nine,
when the boys finished work—during which they noticed
nothing amiss—the sun had risen, delivering another day of
pheasant-season perfection. As they left the property and
ran along the lane, they waved at an incoming car, and a
girl waved back. She was a classmate of Nancy Clutter’s,
and her name was also Nancy—Nancy Ewalt. She was the
only child of the man who was driving the car, Mr. Clarence
Ewalt, a middle-aged sugar-beet farmer. Mr. Ewalt was not
himself a churchgoer, nor was his wife, but every Sunday he
dropped his daughter at River Valley Farm in order that she
might accompany the Clutter family to Methodist services in
Garden City. The arrangement saved him “making two
back-and-forth trips to town.” It was his custom to wait until
he had seen his daughter safely admitted to the house.
Nancy, a clothes-conscious girl with a film-star figure, a
bespectacled countenance, and a coy, tiptoe way of
walking, crossed the lawn and pressed the front-door bell.
The house had four entrances, and when, after repeated
knockings, there was no response at this one, she moved
on to the next—that of Mr. Clutter’s office. Here the door
was partly open; she opened it somewhat more—enough
to ascertain that the office was filled only with shadow—but
she did not think the Clutters would appreciate her “barging
right in.” She knocked, rang, and at last walked around to
the back of the house. The garage was there, and she
noted that both cars were in it: two Chevrolet sedans.
Which meant they must be home. However, having applied
unavailingly at a third door, which led into a “utility room,”
and a fourth, the door to the kitchen, she rejoined her father,
who said, “Maybe they’re asleep.”
“But that’s impossible. Can you imagine Mr. Clutter missing
church? Just to sleep?”
“Come on, then. We’ll drive down to the Teacherage.
Susan ought to know what’s happened.”
The Teacherage, which stands opposite the up-to-date
school, is an out-of-date edifice, drab and poignant. Its
twenty-odd rooms are separated into grace-and-favor
apartments for those members of the faculty unable to find,
or afford, other quarters. Nevertheless, Susan Kidwell and
her mother had managed to sugar the pill and install a cozy
atmosphere in their apartment—three rooms on the ground
floor. The very small living room incredibly contained—
aside from things to sit on—an organ, a piano, a garden of
flowering flowerpots, and usually a darting little dog and a
large, drowsy cat. Susan, on this Sunday morning, stood at
the window of this room watching the street. She is a tall,
languid young lady with a pallid, oval face and beautiful
pale-blue-gray eyes; her hands are extraordinary—long-
fingered, flexible, nervously elegant. She was dressed for
church, and expected momentarily to see the Clutters’
Chevrolet, for she, too, always attended services
chaperoned by the Clutter family. Instead, the Ewalts
arrived to tell their peculiar tale.
But Susan knew no explanation, nor did her mother, who
said, “If there was some change of plan, why, I’m sure they
would have telephoned. Susan, why don’t you call the
house? They could be asleep—Isuppose.”
“So Idid,” said Susan, in a statement made at a later date.
“Icalled the house and let the phone ring—at least, Ihad the
impression it was ringing—oh, a minute or more. Nobody
answered, so Mr. Ewalt suggested that we go to the house
and try to ‘wake them up.’ But when we got there—Ididn’t
want to do it. Go inside the house. Iwas frightened, and I
don’t know why, because it never occurred to me—well,
something like that just doesn’t. But the sun was so bright,
everything looked too bright and quiet. And then Isaw that
all the cars were there, even Kenyon’s old coyote wagon.
Mr. Ewalt was wearing work clothes; he had mud on his
boots; he felt he wasn’t properly dressed to go calling on
the Clutters. Especially since he never had. Been in the
house, Imean. Finally, Nancy said she would go with me.
We went around to the kitchen door, and, of course, it
wasn’t locked; the only person who ever locked doors
around there was Mrs. Helm—the family never did. We
walked in, and Isaw right away that the Clutters hadn’t
eaten breakfast; there were no dishes, nothing on the
stove. Then Inoticed something funny: Nancy’s purse. It
was lying on the floor, sort of open. We passed on through
the dining room, and stopped at the bottom of the stairs.
Nancy’s room is just at the top. Icalled her name, and
started up the stairs, and Nancy Ewalt followed. The sound
of our footsteps frightened me more than anything, they
were so loud and everything else was so silent. Nancy’s
door was open. The curtains hadn’t been drawn, and the
room was full of sunlight. Idon’t remember screaming.
Nancy Ewalt says Idid—screamed and screamed. Ionly
remember Nancy’s Teddy bear staring at me. And Nancy.
And running . . .”
In the interim, Mr. Ewalt had decided that perhaps he ought
not to have allowed the girls to enter the house alone. He
was getting out of the car to go after them when he heard
the screams, but before he could reach the house, the girls
were running toward him. His daughter shouted, “She’s
dead!” and flung herself into his arms. “It’s true, Daddy!
Nancy’s dead!”
Susan turned on her. “No, she isn’t. And don’t you say it.
Don’t you dare. It’s only a nosebleed. She has them all the
time, terrible nosebleeds, and that’s all it is.”
“There’s too much blood. There’s blood on the walls. You
didn’t really look.”
“Icouldn’t make head nor tails,” Mr. Ewalt subsequently
testified. “Ithought maybe the child was hurt. It seemed to
me the first thing to do was call an ambulance. Miss Kidwell
—Susan—she told me there was a telephone in the
kitchen. Ifound it, right where she said. But the receiver
was off the hook, and when Ipicked it up, Isaw the line had
been cut.”
Larry Hendricks, a teacher of English, aged twenty-seven,
lived on the top floor of the Teacherage. He wanted to write,
but his apartment was not the ideal lair for a would-be
author. It was smaller than the Kidwells’, and, moreover, he
shared it with a wife, three active children, and a perpetually
functioning television set. (“It’s the only way we can keep
the kids pacified.”) Though as yet unpublished, young
Hendricks, a he-mannish ex-sailor from Oklahoma who
smokes a pipe and has a mustache and a crop of untamed
black hair, at least looks literary—in fact, remarkably like
youthful photographs of the writer he most admires, Ernest
Hemingway. To supplement his teacher’s salary, he also
drove a school bus.
“Sometimes Icover sixty miles a day,” he said to an
acquaintance. “Which doesn’t leave much time for writing.
Except Sundays. Now, that Sunday, November fifteenth, I
was sitting up here in the apartment going through the
papers. Most of my ideas for stories, Iget them out of the
newspapers—you know? Well, the TV was on and the kids
were kind of lively, but even so Icould hear voices. From
downstairs. Down at Mrs. Kidwell’s. But Ididn’t figure it was
my concern, since Iwas new here—only came to Holcomb
when school began. But then Shirley—she’d been out
hanging up some clothes—my wife, Shirley, rushed in and
said, ‘Honey, you better go downstairs. They’re all
hysterical.’ The two girls—now, they really were hysterical.
Susan never has got over it. Never will, ask me. And poor
Mrs. Kidwell. Her health’s not too good, she’s high-strung to
begin with. She kept saying—but it was only later I
understood what she meant—she kept saying, ‘Oh, Bonnie,
Bonnie, what happened? You were so happy, you told me it
was all over, you said you’d never be sick again.’ Words to
that effect. Even Mr. Ewalt, he was about as worked up as
a man like that ever gets. He had the sheriff’s office on the
phone—the Garden City sheriff—and he was telling him
that there was ‘something radically wrong over at the
Clutter place.’ The sheriff promised to come straight out,
and Mr. Ewalt said fine, he’d meet him on the highway.
Shirley came downstairs to sit with the women, try and calm
them—as if anybody could. And Iwent with Mr. Ewalt—
drove with him out to the highway to wait for Sheriff
Robinson. On the way, he told me what had happened.
When he came to the part about finding the wires cut, right
then Ithought, Uh-uh, and decided I’d better keep my eyes
open. Make a note of every detail. In case Iwas ever called
on to testify in court.
“The sheriff arrived; it was nine thirty-five—Ilooked at my
watch. Mr. Ewalt waved at him to follow our car, and we
drove out to the Clutters’. I’d never been there before, only
seen it from a distance. Of course, Iknew the family.
Kenyon was in my sophomore English class, and I’d
directed Nancy in the ‘Tom Sawyer’ play. But they were
such exceptional, unassuming kids you wouldn’t have
known they were rich or lived in such a big house—and the
trees, the lawn, everything so tended and cared for. After
we got there, and the sheriff had heard Mr. Ewalt’s story, he
radioed his office and told them to send reinforcements,
and an ambulance. Said, ‘There’s been some kind of
accident.’ Then we went in the house, the three of us. Went
through the kitchen and saw a lady’s purse lying on the
floor, and the phone where the wires had been cut. The
sheriff was wearing a hip pistol, and when we started up the
stairs, going to Nancy’s room, Inoticed he kept his hand on
it, ready to draw.
“Well, it was pretty bad. That wonderful girl—but you would
never have known her. She’d been shot in the back of the
head with a shotgun held maybe two inches away. She was
lying on her side, facing the wall, and the wall was covered
with blood. The bedcovers were drawn up to her shoulders.
Sheriff Robinson, he pulled them back, and we saw that
she was wearing a bathrobe, pajamas, socks, and slippers
—like, whenever it happened, she hadn’t gone to bed yet.
Her hands were tied behind her, and her ankles were roped
together with the kind of cord you see on Venetian blinds.
Sheriff said, ‘Is this Nancy Clutter?’—he’d never seen the
child before. And Isaid, ‘Yes. Yes, that’s Nancy.’
“We stepped back into the hall, and looked around. All the
other doors were closed. We opened one, and that turned
out to be a bathroom. Something about it seemed wrong. I
decided it was because of the chair—a sort of dining-room
chair, that looked out of place in a bathroom. The next door
—we all agreed it must be Kenyon’s room. A lot of boy-stuff
scattered around. And Irecognized Kenyon’s glasses—
saw them on a bookshelf beside the bed. But the bed was
empty, though it looked as if it had been slept in. So we
walked to the end of the hall, the last door, and there, on her
bed, that’s where we found Mrs. Clutter. She’d been tied,
too. But differently—with her hands in front of her, so that
she looked as though she were praying—and in one hand
she was holding, gripping, a handkerchief. Or was it
Kleenex? The cord around her wrists ran down to her
ankles, which were bound together, and then ran on down
to the bottom of the bed, where it was tied to the footboard
—a very complicated, artful piece of work. Think how long it
took to do! And her lying there, scared out of her wits. Well,
she was wearing some jewelry, two rings—which is one of
the reasons why I’ve always discounted robbery as a
motive—and a robe, and a white nightgown, and white
socks. Her mouth had been taped with adhesive, but she’d
been shot point-blank in the side of the head, and the blast
—the impact—had ripped the tape loose. Her eyes were
open. Wide open. As though she were still looking at the
killer. Because she must have had to watch him do it—aim
the gun. Nobody said anything. We were too stunned. I
remember the sheriff searched around to see if he could
find the discharged cartridge. But whoever had done it was
much too smart and cool to have left behind any clues like
that.
“Naturally, we were wondering where was Mr. Clutter? And
Kenyon? Sheriff said, ‘Let’s try downstairs.’ The first place
we tried was the master bedroom—the room where Mr.
Clutter slept. The bedcovers were drawn back, and lying
there, toward the foot of the bed, was a billfold with a mess
of cards spilling out of it, like somebody had shuffled
through them hunting something particular—a note, an
I.O.U., who knows? The fact that there wasn’t any money in
it didn’t signify one way or the other. It was Mr. Clutter’s
billfold, and he never did carry cash. Even Iknew that, and
I’d only been in Holcomb a little more than two months.
Another thing Iknew was that neither Mr. Clutter nor Kenyon
could see a darn without his glasses. And there were Mr.
Clutter’s glasses sitting on a bureau. So Ifigured, wherever
they were, they weren’t there of their own accord. We
looked all over, and everything was just as it should be—no
sign of a struggle, nothing disturbed. Except the office,
where the telephone was off the hook, and the wires cut,
same as in the kitchen. Sheriff Robinson, he found some
shotguns in a closet, and sniffed them to see if they had
been fired recently. Said they hadn’t, and—Inever saw a
more bewildered man—said, ‘Where the devil can Herb
be?’ About then we heard footsteps. Coming up the stairs
from the basement. ‘Who’s that?’ said the sheriff, like he
was ready to shoot. And a voice said, ‘It’s me. Wendle.’
Turned out to be Wendle Meier, the undersheriff. Seems he
had come to the house and hadn’t seen us, so he’d gone
investigating down in the basement. The sheriff told him—
and it was sort of pitiful: ‘Wendle, Idon’t know what to make
of it. There’s two bodies upstairs.’ ‘Well,’ he said, Wendle
did, ‘there’s another one down here.’ So we followed him
down to the basement. Or playroom, Iguess you’d call it. It
wasn’t dark—there were windows that let in plenty of light.
Kenyon was over in a corner, lying on a couch. He was
gagged with adhesive tape and bound hand and foot, like
the mother—the same intricate process of the cord leading
from the hands to the feet, and finally tied to an arm of the
couch. Somehow he haunts me the most, Kenyon does. I
think it’s because he was the most recognizable, the one
that looked the most like himself—even though he’d been
shot in the face, directly, head-on. He was wearing a T-shirt
and blue jeans, and he was barefoot—as though he’d
dressed in a hurry, just put on the first thing that came to
hand. His head was propped by a couple of pillows, like
they’d been stuffed under him to make an easier target.
“Then the sheriff said, ‘Where’s this go to?’ Meaning
another door there in the basement. Sheriff led the way, but
inside you couldn’t see your hand until Mr. Ewalt found the
light switch. It was a furnace room, and very warm. Around
here, people just install a gas furnace and pump the gas
smack out of the ground. Doesn’t cost them a nickel—that’s
why all the houses are overheated. Well, Itook one look at
Mr. Clutter, and it was hard to look again. Iknew plain
shooting couldn’t account for that much blood. And Iwasn’t
wrong. He’d been shot, all right, the same as Kenyon—with
the gun held right in front of his face. But probably he was
dead before he was shot. Or, anyway, dying. Because his
throat had been cut, too. He was wearing striped pajamas
—nothing else. His mouth was taped; the tape had been
wound plumb around his head. His ankles were tied
together, but not his hands—or, rather, he’d managed, God
knows how, maybe in rage or pain, to break the cord
binding his hands. He was sprawled in front of the furnace.
On a big cardboard box that looked as though it had been
laid there specially. A mattress box. Sheriff said, ‘Look
here, Wendle.’ What he was pointing at was a bloodstained
footprint. On the mattress box. A half-sole footprint with
circles—two holes in the center like a pair of eyes. Then
one of us—Mr. Ewalt? Idon’t recall—pointed out something
else. A thing Ican’t get out of my mind. There was a
steampipe overhead, and knotted to it, dangling from it,
was a piece of cord—the kind of cord the killer had used.
Obviously, at some point Mr. Clutter had been tied there,
strung up by his hands, and then cut down. But why? To
torture him? Idon’t guess we’ll ever know. Ever know who
did it, or why, or what went on in that house that night.
“After a bit, the house began to fill up. Ambulances arrived,
and the coroner, and the Methodist minister, a police
photographer, state troopers, fellows from the radio and the
newspaper. Oh, a bunch. Most of them had been called out
of church, and acted as though they were still there. Very
quiet. Whispery. It was like nobody could believe it. A state
trooper asked me did Ihave any official business there,
and said if not, then I’d better leave. Outside, on the lawn, I
saw the undersheriff talking to a man—Alfred Stoecklein,
the hired man. Seems Stoecklein lived not a hundred yards
from the Clutter house, with nothing between his place and
theirs except a barn. But he was saying as to how he hadn’t
heard a sound—said, ‘Ididn’t know a thing about it till five
minutes ago, when one of my kids come running in and told
us the sheriff was here. The Missis and me, we didn’t sleep
two hours last night, was up and down the whole time, on
account of we got a sick baby. But the only thing we heard,
about ten-thirty, quarter to eleven, Iheard a car drive away,
and Imade the remark to Missis, “There goes Bob Rupp.” ‘I
started walking home, and on the way, about halfway down
the lane, Isaw Kenyon’s old collie, and that dog was
scared. Stood there with its tail between its legs, didn’t
bark or move. And seeing the dog—somehow that made
me feel again. I’d been too dazed, too numb, to feel the full
viciousness of it. The suffering. The horror. They were
dead. A whole family. Gentle, kindly people, people I knew
—murdered. You had to believe it, because it was really
true.”
Eight non-stop passenger trains hurry through Holcomb
every twenty-four hours. Of these, two pick up and deposit
mail—an operation that, as the person in charge of it
fervently explains, has its tricky side. “Yessir, you’ve got to
keep on your toes. Them trains come through here,
sometimes they’re going a hundred miles an hour. The
breeze alone why, it’s enough to knock you down. And
when those mail sacks come flying out—sakes alive! It’s
like playing tackle on a football team: Wham! Wham!
WHAM! Not that I’m complaining, mind you. It’s honest
work, government work, and it keeps me young.”
Holcomb’s mail messenger, Mrs. Sadie Truitt—or Mother
Truitt, as the townspeople call her—does seem younger
than her years, which amount to seventy-five. A stocky,
weathered widow who wears babushka bandannas and
cowboy boots (“Most comfortable things you can put on
your feet, soft as a loon feather”), Mother Truitt is the oldest
native-born Holcombite. “Time was wasn’t anybody here
wasn’t my kin. Them days, we called this place Sherlock.
Then along came this stranger. By the name Holcomb. A
hog raiser, he was. Made money, and decided the town
ought to be called after him. Soon as it was, what did he
do? Sold out. Moved to California. Not us. Iwas born here,
my children was born here. And! Here! We! Are!” One of
her children is Mrs. Myrtle Clare, who happens to be the
local postmistress. “Only, don’t go thinking that’s how Igot
this position with the government. Myrt didn’t even want me
to have it. But it’s a job you bid for. Goes to whoever puts in
the lowest bid. And Ialways do—so low a caterpillar could
peek over it. Ha-ha! That sure does rile the boys. Lots of
boys would like to be mail messenger, yessir. But Idon’t
know how much they’d like it when the snow’s high as old
Mr. Primo Camera, and the wind’s blowing blue-hard, and
those sacks come sailing—Ugh! Wham!”
In Mother Truitt’s profession, Sunday is a workday like any
other. On November 15, while she was waiting for the
westbound ten-thirty-two, she was astonished to see two
ambulances cross the railroad tracks and turn toward the
Clutter property. The incident provoked her into doing what
she had never done before—abandon her duties. Let the
mail fall where it may, this was news that Myrt must hear at
once.
The people of Holcomb speak of their post office as “the
Federal Building,” which seems rather too substantial a title
to confer on a drafty and dusty shed. The ceiling leaks, the
floor boards wobble, the mailboxes won’t shut, the light
bulbs are broken, the clock has stopped. “Yes, it’s a
disgrace,” agrees the caustic, somewhat original, and
entirely imposing lady who presides over this litter. “But the
stamps work, don’t they? Anyhow, what do Icare? Back
here in my part is real cozy. I’ve got my rocker, and a nice
wood stove, and a coffee pot, and plenty to read.”
Mrs. Clare is a famous figure in Finney County. Her
celebrity derives not from her present occupation but a
previous one—dance-hall hostess, an incarnation not
indicated by her appearance. She is a gaunt, trouser-
wearing, woolen-shirted, cowboy-booted, ginger-colored,
gingery-tempered woman of unrevealed age (“That’s for
me to know, and you to guess”) but promptly revealed
opinions, most of which are announced in a voice of
rooster-crow altitude and penetration. Until 1955 she and
her late husband operated the Holcomb Dance Pavilion, an
enterprise that owing to its uniqueness in the area,
attracted from a hundred miles around a fast-drinking,
fancy-stepping clientele, whose behavior, in turn, attracted
the interest of the sheriff now and then. “We had some
tough times, all right,” says Mrs. Clare, reminiscing. “Some
of those bowlegged country boys, you give ’em a little
hooch and they’re like redskins—want to scalp everything
in sight. Course, we only sold setups, never the hard stuff
itself. Wouldn’t have, even if it was legal. My husband,
Homer Clare, he didn’t hold with it; neither did I. One day
Homer Clare—he passed on seven months and twelve
days ago today, after a five-hour operation out in Oregon—
he said to me, ‘Myrt, we’ve lived all our lives in hell, now
we’re going to die in heaven.’ The next day we closed the
dance hall. I’ve never regretted it. Oh, along at first Imissed
being a night owl—the tunes, the jollity. But now that
Homer’s gone, I’m just glad to do my work here at the
Federal Building. Sit a spell. Drink a cup of coffee.”
In fact, on that Sunday morning Mrs. Clare had just poured
herself a cup of coffee from a freshly brewed pot when
Mother Truitt returned.
“Myrt!” she said, but could say no more until she had caught
her breath. “Myrt, there’s two ambulances gone to the
Clutters’.”
Her daughter said, “Where’s the ten-thirty-two?”
“Ambulances. Gone to the Clutters’—”
“Well, what about it? It’s only Bonnie. Having one of her
spells. Where’s the ten-thirty-two?”
Mother Truitt subsided; as usual, Myrt knew the answer,
was enjoying the last word. Then a thought occurred to her.
“But Myrt, if it’s only Bonnie, why would there be two
ambulances?”
A sensible question, as Mrs. Clare, an admirer of logic,
though a curious interpreter of it, was driven to admit. She
said she would telephone Mrs. Helm. “Mabel will know,” she
said.
The conversation with Mrs. Helm lasted several minutes,
and was most distressing to Mother Truitt, who could hear
nothing of it except the noncommittal monosyllabic
responses of her daughter. Worse, when the daughter hung
up, she did not quench the old woman’s curiosity; instead,
she placidly drank her coffee, went to her desk, and began
to postmark a pile of letters.
“Myrt,” Mother Truitt said. “For heaven’s sake. What did
Mabel say?”
“I’m not surprised,” Mrs. Clare said. “When you think how
Herb Clutter spent his whole life in a hurry, rushing in here
to get his mail with never a minute to say good-morning-
and-thank-you-dog, rushing around like a chicken with its
head off—joining clubs, running everything, getting jobs
maybe other people wanted. And now look—it’s all caught
up with him. Well, he won’t be rushing any more.”
“Why, Myrt? Why won’t he?”
Mrs. Clare raised her voice. “BECAUSE HE’S DEAD. And
Bonnie, too. And Nancy. And the boy. Somebody shot
them.”
“Myrt—don’t say things like that. Who shot them?”
Without a pause in her postmarking activities, Mrs. Clare
replied, “The man in the airplane. The one Herb sued for
crashing into his fruit trees. If it wasn’t him, maybe it was
you. Or somebody across the street. All the neighbors are
rattlesnakes. Varmints looking for a chance to slam the
door in your face. It’s the same the whole world over. You
know that.”
“Idon’t,” said Mother Truitt, who put her hands over her
ears. “Idon’t know any such thing.”
“Varmints.”
“I’m scared, Myrt.”
“Of what? When your time comes, it comes. And tears
won’t save you.” She had observed that her mother had
begun to shed a few. “When Homer died, Iused up all the
fear Ihad in me, and all the grief, too. If there’s somebody
loose around here that wants to cut my throat, Iwish him
luck. What difference does it make? It’s all the same in
eternity. Just remember: If one bird carried every grain of
sand, grain by grain, across the ocean, by the time he got
them all on the other side, that would only be the beginning
of eternity. So blow your nose.”
The grim information, announced from church pulpits,
distributed over telephone wires, publicized by Garden
City’s radio station, KIUL (“A tragedy, unbelievable and
shocking beyond words, struck four members of the Herb
Clutter family late Saturday night or early today. Death,
brutal and without apparent motive . . .”), produced in the
average recipient a reaction nearer that of Mother Truitt
than that of Mrs. Clare: amazement, shading into dismay; a
shallow horror sensation that cold springs of personal fear
swiftly deepened.
Hartman’s Café, which contains four roughly made tables
and a lunch counter, could accommodate but a fraction of
the frightened gossips, mostly male, who wished to gather
there. The owner, Mrs. Bess Hartman, a sparsely fleshed,
unfoolish lady with bobbed gray-and-gold hair and bright,
authoritative green eyes, is a cousin of Postmistress Clare,
whose style of candor Mrs. Hartman can equal, perhaps
surpass. “Some people say I’m a tough old bird, but the
Clutter business sure took the fly out of me,” she later said
to a friend. “Imagine anybody pulling a stunt like that! Time I
heard it, when everybody was pouring in here talking all
kinds of wild-eyed stuff, my first thought was Bonnie.
Course, it was silly, but we didn’t know the facts, and a lot
of people thought maybe—on account of her spells. Now
we don’t know what to think. It must have been a grudge
killing. Done by somebody who knew the house inside out.
But who hated the Clutters? Inever heard a word against
them; they were about as popular as a family can be, and if
something like this could happen to them, then who’s safe, I
ask you? One old man sitting here that Sunday, he put his
finger right on it, the reason nobody can sleep; he said, ‘All
we’ve got out here are our friends. There isn’t anything
else.’ In a way, that’s the worst part of the crime. What a
terrible thing when neighbors can’t look at each other
without kind of wondering! Yes, it’s a hard fact to live with,
but if they ever do find out who done it, I’m sure it’ll be a
bigger surprise than the murders themselves.”
Mrs. Bob Johnson, the wife of the New York Life Insurance
agent, is an excellent cook, but the Sunday dinner she had
prepared was not eaten—at least, not while it was warm—
for just as her husband was plunging a knife into the roast
pheasant, he received a telephone call from a friend. “And
that,” he recalls, rather ruefully, “was the first Iheard of what
had happened in Holcomb. Ididn’t believe it. Icouldn’t
afford to. Lord, Ihad Clutter’s check right here in my pocket.
A piece of paper worth eighty thousand dollars. If what I’d
heard was true. But Ithought, It can’t be, there must be
some mistake, things like that don’t happen, you don’t sell a
man a big policy one minute and he’s dead the next.
Murdered. Meaning double indemnity. Ididn’t know what to
do. Icalled the manager of our office in Wichita. Told him
how Ihad the check but hadn’t put it through, and asked
what was his advice? Well, it was a delicate situation. It
appeared that legally we weren’t obliged to pay. But
morally—that was another matter. Naturally, we decided to
do the moral thing.”
The two persons who benefited by this honorable attitude—
Eveanna Jarchow and her sister Beverly, sole heirs to their
father’s estate—were, within a few hours of the awful
discovery, on their way to Garden City, Beverly traveling
from Winfield, Kansas, where she had been visiting her
fiancé, and Eveanna from her home in Mount Carroll,
Illinois. Gradually, in the course of the day, other relatives
were notified, among them Mr. Clutter’s father, his two
brothers, Arthur and Clarence, and his sister, Mrs. Harry
Nelson, all of Larned, Kansas, and a second sister, Mrs.
Elaine Selsor, of Palatka, Florida. Also, the parents of
Bonnie Clutter, Mr. and Mrs. Arthur B. Fox, who live in
Pasadena, California, and her three brothers—Harold, of
Visalia, California; Howard, of Oregon, Illinois; and Glenn,
of Kansas City, Kansas. Indeed, the better part of those on
the Clutters’ Thanksgiving guest list were either telephoned
or telegraphed, and the majority set forth at once for what
was to be a family reunion not around a groaning board but
at the graveside of a mass burial.
At the Teacherage, Wilma Kidwell was forced to control
herself in order to control her daughter, for Susan, puffy-
eyed, sickened by spasms of nausea, argued, inconsolably
insisted, that she must go—must run—the three miles to the
Rupp farm. “Don’t you see, Mother?” she said. “If Bobby
just hears it? He loved her. We both did. Ihave to be the
one to tell him.”
But Bobby already knew. On his way home, Mr. Ewalt had
stopped at the Rupp farm and consulted with his friend
Johnny Rupp, a father of eight, of whom Bobby is the third.
Together, the two men went to the bunkhouse—a building
separate from the farmhouse proper, which is too small to
shelter all the Rupp children. The boys live in the
bunkhouse, the girls “at home.” They found Bobby making
his bed. He listened to Mr. Ewalt, asked no questions, and
thanked him for coming. Afterward, he stood outside in the
sunshine. The Rupp property is on a rise, an exposed
plateau, from which he could see the harvested, glowing
land of River Valley Farm—scenery that occupied him for
perhaps an hour. Those who tried to distract him could not.
The dinner bell sounded, and his mother called to him to
come inside—called until finally her husband said, “No. I’d
leave him alone.”
Larry, a younger brother, also refused to obey the
summoning bell. He circled around Bobby, helpless to help
but wanting to, even though he was told to “go away.” Later,
when his brother stopped standing and started to walk,
heading down the road and across the fields toward
Holcomb, Larry pursued him. “Hey, Bobby. Listen. If we’re
going somewhere, why don’t we go in the car?” His brother
wouldn’t answer. He was walking with purpose, running,
really, but Larry had no difficulty keeping stride. Though only
fourteen, he was the taller of the two, the deeper-chested,
the longer-legged, Bobby being, for all his athletic honors,
rather less than medium-size—compact but slender, a
finely made boy with an open, homely-handsome face.
“Hey, Bobby. Listen. They won’t let you see her. It won’t do
any good.” Bobby turned on him, and said, “Go back. Go
home.” The younger brother fell behind, then followed at a
distance. Despite the pumpkin-season temperature, the
day’s arid glitter, both boys were sweating as they
approached a barricade that state troopers had erected at
the entrance to River Valley Farm. Many friends of the
Clutter family, and strangers from all over Finney County as
well, had assembled at the site, but none was allowed past
the barricade, which, soon after the arrival of the Rupp
brothers, was briefly lifted to permit the exit of four
ambulances, the number finally required to remove the
victims, and a car filled with men from the sheriff’s office—
men who, even at that moment, were mentioning the name
of Bobby Rupp. For Bobby, as he was to learn before
nightfall, was their principal suspect.
From her parlor window, Susan Kidwell saw the white
cortege glide past, and watched until it had rounded the
corner and the unpaved street’s easily airborne dust had
landed again. She was still contemplating the view when
Bobby, shadowed by his large little brother, became a part
of it, a wobbly figure headed her way. She went out on the
porch to meet him. She said, “Iwanted so much to tell you.”
Bobby began to cry. Larry lingered at the edge of the
Teacherage yard, hunched against a tree. He couldn’t
remember ever seeing Bobby cry, and he didn’t want to, so
he lowered his eyes.
Far off, in the town of Olathe, in a hotel room where window
shades darkened the midday sun, Perry lay sleeping, with a
gray portable radio murmuring beside him. Except for
taking off his boots, he had not troubled to undress. He had
merely fallen face down across the bed, as though sleep
were a weapon that had struck him from behind. The boots,
black and silver-buckled, were soaking in a washbasin
filled with warm, vaguely pink-tinted water.
A few miles north, in the pleasant kitchen of a modest
farmhouse, Dick was consuming a Sunday dinner. The
others at the table—his mother, his father, his younger
brother—were not conscious of anything uncommon in his
manner. He had arrived home at noon, kissed his mother,
readily replied to questions his father put concerning his
supposed overnight trip to Fort Scott, and sat down to eat,
seeming quite his ordinary self. When the meal was over,
the three male members of the family settled in the parlor to
watch a televised basketball game. The broadcast had only
begun when the father was startled to hear Dick snoring; as
he remarked to the younger boy, he never thought he’d live
to see the day when Dick would rather sleep than watch
basketball. But, of course, he did not understand how very
tired Dick was, did not know that his dozing son had,
among other things, driven over eight hundred miles in the
past twenty-four hours.

