II
PERSONS UNKNOWN
That Monday, the sixteenth of November, 1959, was still
another fine specimen of pheasant weather on the high
wheat plains of western Kansas—a day gloriously bright-
skied, as glittery as mica. Often, on such days in years
past, Andy Erhart had spent long pheasant-hunting
afternoons at River Valley Farm, the home of his good
friend Herb Clutter, and often, on these sporting
expeditions, he’d been accompanied by three more of
Herb’s closest friends: Dr. J. E. Dale, a veterinarian; Carl
Myers, a dairy owner; and Everett Ogburn, a businessman.
Like Erhart, the superintendent of the Kansas State
University Agricultural Experiment Station, all were
prominent citizens of Garden City.
Today this quartet of old hunting companions had once
again gathered to make the familiar journey, but in an
unfamiliar spirit and armed with odd, non-sportive
equipment—mops and pails, scrubbing brushes, and a
hamper heaped with rags and strong detergents. They
were wearing their oldest clothes. For, feeling it their duty, a
Christian task, these men had volunteered to clean certain
of the fourteen rooms in the main house at River Valley
Farm: rooms in which four members of the Clutter family
had been murdered by, as their death certificates declared,
“a person or persons unknown.”
Erhart and his partners drove in silence. One of them later
remarked, “It just shut you up. The strangeness of it. Going
out there, where we’d always had such a welcome.” On the
present occasion a highway patrolman welcomed them.
The patrolman, guardian of a barricade that the authorities
had erected at the entrance to the farm, waved them on,
and they drove a half mile more, down the elm-shaded lane
leading to the Clutter house. Alfred Stoecklein, the only
employee who actually lived on the property, was waiting to
admit them.
They went first to the furnace room in the basement, where
the pajama-clad Mr. Clutter had been found sprawled atop
the cardboard mattress box. Finishing there, they moved on
to the playroom in which Kenyon had been shot to death.
The couch, a relic that Kenyon had rescued and mended
and that Nancy had slip-covered and piled with mottoed
pillows, was a blood-splashed ruin; like the mattress box, it
would have to be burned. Gradually, as the cleaning party
progressed from the basement to the second-floor
bedrooms where Nancy and her mother had been
murdered in their beds, they acquired additional fuel for the
impending fire-blood-soiled bedclothes, mattresses, a
bedside rug, a Teddy-bear doll.
Alfred Stoecklein, not usually a talkative man, had much to
say as he fetched hot water and otherwise assisted in the
cleaning-up. He wished “folks would stop yappin’ and try to
understand” why he and his wife, though they lived scarcely
a hundred yards from the Clutter home, had heard “nary a
nothin’ ”—not the slightest echo of gun thunder—of the
violence taking place. “Sheriff and all them fellas been out
here fingerprintin’ and scratchin’ around, they got good
sense, they understand how it was. How come we didn’t
hear. For one thing, the wind. A west wind, like it was,
would carry the sound t’other way. Another thing, there’s
that big milo barn ’tween this house and our’n. That old barn
’ud soak up a lotta racket ’fore it reached us. And did you
ever think of this? Him that done it, he must’ve knowed we
wouldn’t hear. Else he wouldn’t have took the chance—
shootin’ off a shotgun four times in the middle of the night!
Why, he’d be crazy. Course, you might say he must be
crazy anyhow. To go doing what he did. But my opinion,
him that done it had it figured out to the final T. He knowed.
And there’s one thing Iknow, too. Me and the Missis, we’ve
slept our last night on this place. We’re movin’ to a house
alongside the highway.”
The men worked from noon to dusk. When the time came
to burn what they had collected, they piled it on a pickup
truck and, with Stoecklein at the wheel, drove deep into the
farm’s north field, a flat place full of color, though a single
color—the shimmering tawny yellow of November wheat
stubble. There they unloaded the truck and made a pyramid
of Nancy’s pillows, the bedclothes, the mattresses, the
playroom couch; Stoecklein sprinkled it with kerosene and
struck a match.
Of those present, none had been closer to the Clutter family
than Andy Erhart. Gentle, genially dignified, a scholar with
work-calloused hands and sunburned neck, he’d been a
classmate of Herb’s at Kansas State University. “We were
friends for thirty years,” he said some time afterward, and
during those decades Erhart had seen his friend evolve
from a poorly paid County Agricultural Agent into one of the
region’s most widely known and respected farm ranchers:
“Everything Herb had, he earned—with the help of God. He
was a modest man but a proud man, as he had a right to
be. He raised a fine family. He made something of his life.”
But that life, and what he’d made of it—how could it
happen, Erhart wondered as he watched the bonfire catch.
How was it possible that such effort, such plain virtue, could
overnight be reduced to this smoke, thinning as it rose and
was received by the big, annihilating sky?
The Kansas Bureau of investigation, a state-wide
organization with headquarters in Topeka, had a staff of
nineteen experienced detectives scattered through the
state, and the services of these men are available
whenever a case seems beyond the competence of local
authorities. The Bureau’s Garden City representative, and
the agent responsible for a sizable portion of western
Kansas, is a lean and handsome fourth-generation Kansan
of forty-seven named Alvin Adams Dewey. It was inevitable
that Earl Robinson, the sheriff of Finney County, should ask
Al Dewey to take charge of the Clutter case. Inevitable, and
appropriate. For Dewey, himself a former sheriff of Finney
County (from 1947 to 1955) and, prior to that, a Special
Agent of the F.B.I. (between 1940 and 1945 he had served
in New Orleans, in San Antonio, in Denver, in Miami, and in
San Francisco), was professionally qualified to cope with
even as intricate an affair as the apparently motiveless, all
but clueless Clutter murders. Moreover, his attitude toward
the crime made it, as he later said, “a personal
proposition.” He went on to say that he and his wife “were
real fond of Herb and Bonnie,” and “saw them every
Sunday at church, visited a lot back and forth,” adding, “But
even if Ihadn’t known the family, and liked them so well, I
wouldn’t feel any different. Because I’ve seen some bad
things, Isure as hell have. But nothing so vicious as this.
However long it takes, it may be the rest of my life, I’m
going to know what happened in that house: the why and
the who.”
Toward the end, a total of eighteen men were assigned to
the case full time, among them three of the K.B.I.’s ablest
investigators—Special Agents Harold Nye, Roy Church,
and Clarence Duntz. With the arrival in Garden City of this
trio, Dewey was satisfied that “a strong team” had been
assembled. “Somebody better watch out,” he said.
The sheriff’s office is on the third floor of the Finney County
courthouse, an ordinary stone-and-cement building
standing in the center of an otherwise attractive tree-filled
square. Nowadays, Garden City, which was once a rather
raucous frontier town, is quite subdued. On the whole, the
sheriff doesn’t do much business, and his office, three
sparsely furnished rooms, is ordinarily a quiet place
popular with courthouse idlers; Mrs. Edna Richardson, his
hospitable secretary, usually has a pot of coffee going and
plenty of time to “chew the fat.” Or did, until, as she
complained, “this Clutter thing came along,” bringing with it
“all these out-of-towners, all this newspaper fuss.” The case,
then commanding headlines as far east as Chicago, as far
west as Denver, had indeed lured to Garden City a
considerable press corps.
On Monday, at midday, Dewey held a press conference in
the sheriffs office. “I’ll talk facts but not theories,” he
informed the assembled journalists. “Now, the big fact here,
the thing to remember, is we’re not dealing with one murder
but four. And we don’t know which of the four was the main
target. The primary victim. It could have been Nancy or
Kenyon, or either of the parents. Some people say, Well, it
must have been Mr. Clutter. Because his throat was cut; he
was the most abused. But that’s theory, not fact. It would
help if we knew in what order the family died, but the
coroner can’t tell us that; he only knows the murders
happened sometime between eleven P.M. Saturday and two
A.M. Sunday.” Then, responding to questions, he said no,
neither of the women had been “sexually molested,” and no,
as far as was presently known, nothing had been stolen
from the house, and yes, he did think it a “queer
coincidence” that Mr. Clutter should have taken out a forty-
thousand-dollar life-insurance policy, with double indemnity,
within eight hours of his death. However, Dewey was “pretty
darn sure” that no connection existed between this
purchase and the crime; how could there be one, when the
only persons who benefited financially were Mr. Clutter’s
two surviving children, the elder daughters, Mrs. Donald
Jarchow and Miss Beverly Clutter? And yes, he told the
reporters, he did have an opinion on whether the murders
were the work of one man or two, but he preferred not to
disclose it.
Actually, at this time, on this subject, Dewey was
undecided. He still entertained a pair of opinions—or, to
use his word, “concepts”—and, in reconstructing the crime,
had developed both a “single-killer concept” and a “double-
killer concept.” In the former, the murderer was thought to
be a friend of the family, or, at any rate, a man with more
than casual knowledge of the house and its inhabitants—
someone who knew that the doors were seldom locked,
that Mr. Clutter slept alone in the master bedroom on the
ground floor, that Mrs. Clutter and the children occupied
separate bedrooms on the second floor. This person, so
Dewey imagined, approached the house on foot, probably
around midnight. The windows were dark, the Clutters
asleep, and as for Teddy, the farm’s watchdog—well,
Teddy was famously gun-shy. He would have cringed at the
sight of the intruder’s weapon, whimpered, and crept away.
On entering the house, the killer first disposed of the
telephone installations—one in Mr. Clutter’s office, the other
in the kitchen—and then, after cutting the wires, he went to
Mr. Clutter’s bedroom and awakened him. Mr. Clutter, at
the mercy of the gun-bearing visitor, was forced to obey
instructions—forced to accompany him to the second floor,
where they aroused the rest of the family. Then, with cord
and adhesive tape supplied by the killer, Mr. Clutter bound
and gagged his wife, bound his daughter (who,
inexplicably, had not been gagged), and roped them to
their beds. Next, father and son were escorted to the
basement, and there Mr. Clutter was made to tape Kenyon
and tie him to the playroom couch. Then Mr. Clutter was
taken into the furnace room, hit on the head, gagged, and
trussed. Now free to do as he pleased, the murderer killed
them one by one, each time carefully collecting the
discharged shell. When he had finished, he turned out all
the lights and left.
It might have happened that way; it was just possible. But
Dewey had doubts: “If Herb had thought his family was in
danger, mortal danger, he would have fought like a tiger.
And Herb was no ninny—a strong guy in top condition.
Kenyon too—big as his dad, bigger, a big-shouldered boy.
It’s hard to see how one man, armed or not, could have
handled the two of them.” Moreover, there was reason to
suppose that all four had been bound by the same person:
in all four instances the same type of knot, a half hitch, was
used.
Dewey—and the majority of his colleagues, as well—
favored the second hypothesis, which in many essentials
followed the first, the important difference being that the
killer was not alone but had an accomplice, who helped
subdue the family, tape, and tie them. Still, as a theory, this,
too, had its faults. Dewey, for example, found it difficult to
understand “how two individuals could reach the same
degree of rage, the kind of psychopathic rage it took to
commit such a crime.” He went on to explain: “Assuming
the murderer was someone known to the family, a member
of this community; assuming that he was an ordinary man,
ordinary except that he had a quirk, an insane grudge
against the Clutters, or one of the Clutters—where did he
find a partner, someone crazy enough to help him? It
doesn’t add up. It doesn’t make sense. But then, come right
down to it, nothing does.”
After the news conference, Dewey retired to his office, a
room that the sheriff had temporarily lent him. It contained a
desk and two straight chairs. The desk was littered with
what Dewey hoped would some day constitute courtroom
exhibits: the adhesive tape and the yards of cord removed
from the victims and now sealed in plastic sacks (as clues,
neither item seemed very promising, for both were
common-brand products, obtainable anywhere in the
United States), and photographs taken at the scene of the
crime by a police photographer—twenty blown-up glossy-
print pictures of Mr. Clutter’s shattered skull, his son’s
demolished face, Nancy’s bound hands, her mother’s
death-dulled, still-staring eyes, and so on. In days to come,
Dewey was to spend many hours examining these
photographs, hoping that he might “suddenly see
something,” that a meaningful detail would declare itself:
“Like those puzzles. The ones that ask, ‘How many animals
can you find in this picture?’ In a way, that’s what I’m trying
to do. Find the hidden animals. Ifeel they must be there-if
only Icould see them.” As a matter of fact, one of the
photographs, a close-up of Mr. Clutter and the mattress box
upon which he lay, had already provided a valuable
surprise: footprints, the dusty trackings of shoes with
diamond-patterned soles. The prints, not noticeable to the
naked eye, registered on film; indeed, the delineating glare
of a flashbulb had revealed their presence with superb
exactness. These prints, together with another footmark
found on the same cardboard cover—the bold and bloody
impression of a Cat’s Paw half sole—were the only
“serious clues” the investigators could claim. Not that they
were claiming them; Dewey and his team had decided to
keep secret the existence of this evidence.
Among the other articles on Dewey’s desk was Nancy
Clutter’s diary. He had glanced through it, no more than
that, and now he settled down to an earnest reading of the
day-by-day entries, which began on her thirteenth birthday
and ended some two months short of her seventeenth; the
unsensational confidings of an intelligent child who adored
animals, who liked to read, cook, sew, dance, ride
horseback—a popular, pretty, virginal girl who thought it
“fun to flirt” but was nevertheless “only really and truly in love
with Bobby.” Dewey read the final entry first. It consisted of
three lines written an hour or two before she died: “Jolene
K. came over and Ishowed her how to make a cherry pie.
Practiced with Roxie. Bobby here and we watched TV. Left
at eleven.”
Young Rupp, the last person known to have seen the family
alive, had already undergone one extensive interrogation,
and although he’d told a straightforward story of having
passed “just an ordinary evening” with the Clutters, he was
scheduled for a second interview, at which time he was to
be given a polygraph test. The plain fact was that the police
were not quite ready to dismiss him as a suspect. Dewey
himself did not believe the boy had “anything to do with it”;
still, it was true that at this early stage of the investigation,
Bobby was the only person to whom a motive, however
feeble, could be attributed. Here and there in the diary,
Nancy referred to the situation that was supposed to have
created the motive: her father’s insistence that she and
Bobby “break off,” stop “seeing so much of each other,” his
objection being that the Clutters were Methodist, the Rupps
Catholic—a circumstance that in his view completely
canceled any hope the young couple might have of one day
marrying. But the diary notation that most tantalized Dewey
was unrelated to the Clutter-Rupp, Methodist-Catholic
impasse. Rather, it concerned a cat, the mysterious
demise of Nancy’s favorite pet, Boobs, whom, according to
an entry dated two weeks prior to her own death, she’d
found “lying in the barn,” the victim, or so she suspected
(without saying why), of a poisoner: “Poor Boobs. Iburied
him in a special place.” On reading this, Dewey felt it could
be “very important.” If the cat had been poisoned, might not
this act have been a small, malicious prelude to the
murders? He determined to find the “special place” where
Nancy had buried her pet, even though it meant combing
the vast whole of River Valley Farm.
While Dewey was occupying himself with the diary, his
principal assistants, the Agents Church, Duntz, and Nye,
were crisscrossing the countryside, talking, as Duntz said,
“to anyone who could tell us anything”: the faculty of the
Holcomb School, where both Nancy and Kenyon had been
honor-roll, straight-A students; the employees of River
Valley Farm (a staff that in spring and summer sometimes
amounted to as many as eighteen men but in the present
fallow season consisted of Gerald Van Vleet and three
hired men, plus Mrs. Helm); friends of the victims; their
neighbors; and, very particularly, their relatives. From far
and near, some twenty of the last had arrived to attend the
funeral services, which were to take place Wednesday
morning.
The youngest of the K.B.I. group, Harold Nye, who was a
peppy little man of thirty-four with restless, distrustful eyes
and a sharp nose, chin, and mind, had been assigned what
he called “the damned delicate business” of interviewing
the Clutter kinfolk: “It’s painful for you and it’s painful for
them. When it comes to murder, you can’t respect grief. Or
privacy. Or personal feelings. You’ve got to ask the
questions. And some of them cut deep.” But none of the
persons he questioned, and none of the questions he
asked (“Iwas exploring the emotional background. Ithought
the answer might be another woman—a triangle. Well,
consider: Mr. Clutter was a fairly young, very healthy man,
but his wife, she was a semi-invalid, she slept in a separate
bedroom . . .”), produced useful information; not even the
two surviving daughters could suggest a cause for the
crime. In brief, Nye learned only this: “Of all the people in all
the world, the Clutters were the least likely to be murdered.”
At the end of the day, when the three agents convened in
Dewey’s office, it developed that Duntz and Church had
had better luck than Nye—Brother Nye, as the others called
him. (Members of the K.B.I. are partial to nicknames; Duntz
is known as Old Man—unfairly, since he is not quite fifty, a
burly but light-footed man with a broad, tomcat face, and
Church, who is sixty or so, pink-skinned and professorial-
looking, but “tough,”according to his colleagues, and “the
fastest draw in Kansas,” is called Curly, because his head
is partly hairless.) Both men, in the course of their inquiries,
had picked up “promising leads.”
Duntz’s story concerned a father and son who shall here be
known as John Senior and John Junior. Some years earlier
John Senior had conducted with Mr. Clutter a minor
business transaction, the outcome of which angered John
Senior, who felt that Clutter had thrown him “a queer ball.”
Now, both John Senior and his son “boozed”; indeed, John
Junior was an often incarcerated alcoholic. One unfortunate
day father and son, full of whiskey courage, appeared at the
Clutter home intending to “have it out with Herb.” They were
denied the chance, for Mr. Clutter, an abstainer
aggressively opposed to drink and drunkards, seized a gun
and marched them off his property. This discourtesy the
Johns had not forgiven; as recently as a month ago, John
Senior had told an acquaintance, “Every time Ithink of that
bastard, my hands start to twitch. Ijust want to choke him.”
Church’s lead was of a similar nature. He, too, had heard of
someone admittedly hostile to Mr. Clutter: a certain Mr.
Smith (though that is not his true name), who believed that
the squire of River Valley Farm had shot and killed Smith’s
hunting dog. Church had inspected Smith’s farm home and
seen there, hanging from a barn rafter, a length of rope tied
with the same kind of knot that was used to bind the four
Clutters.
Dewey said, “One of those, maybe that’s our deal. A
personal thing—a grudge that got out of hand.”
“Unless it was robbery,” said Nye, though robbery as the
motive had been much discussed and then more or less
dismissed. The arguments against it were good, the
strongest being that Mr. Clutter’s aversion to cash was a
county legend; he had no safe and never carried large
sums of money. Also, if robbery were the explanation, why
hadn’t the robber removed the jewelry that Mrs. Clutter was
wearing—a gold wedding band and a diamond ring? Yet
Nye was not convinced: “The whole setup has that robbery
smell. What about Clutter’s wallet? Someone left it open
and empty on Clutter’s bed—Idon’t think it was the owner.
And Nancy’s purse. The purse was lying on the kitchen
floor. How did it get there? Yes, and not a dime in the
house. Well—two dollars. We found two dollars in an
envelope on Nancy’s desk. And we knowClutter cashed a
check for sixty bucks just the day before. We figure there
ought to have been at least fifty of that left. So some say,
‘Nobody would kill four people for fifty bucks.’ And say,
‘Sure, maybe the killer did take the money—but just to try
and mislead us, make us think robbery was the reason.’ I
wonder.”
As darkness fell, Dewey interrupted the consultation to
telephone his wife, Marie, at their home, and warn her that
he wouldn’t be home for dinner. She said, “Yes. All right,
Alvin,” but he noticed in her tone an uncharacteristic
anxiety. The Deweys, parents of two young boys, had been
married seventeen years, and Marie, a Louisiana-born
former F.B.I. stenographer, whom he’d met while he was
stationed in New Orleans, sympathized with the hardships
of his profession—the eccentric hours, the sudden calls
summoning him to distant areas of the state.
He said, “Anything the matter?”
“Not a thing,” she assured him. “Only, when you come home
tonight, you’ll have to ring the bell. I’ve had all the locks
changed.”
Now he understood, and said, “Don’t worry, honey. Just
lock the doors and turn on the porch light.”
After he’d hung up, a colleague asked, “What’s wrong?
Marie scared?”
“Hell, yes,” Dewey said. “Her, and everybody else.”
Not everybody. Certainly not Holcomb’s widowed
postmistress, the intrepid Mrs. Myrtle Clare, who scorned
her fellow townsmen as “a lily-livered lot, shaking in their
boots afraid to shut their eyes,” and said of herself, “This
old girl, she’s sleeping good as ever. Anybody wants to
play a trick on me, let ’em try.” (Eleven months later a gun-
toting team of masked bandits took her at her word by
invading the post office and relieving the lady of nine
hundred and fifty dollars.) As usual, Mrs. Clare’s notions
conformed with those of very few. “Around here,” according
to the proprietor of one Garden City hardware store, “locks
and bolts are the fastest-going item. Folks ain’t particular
what brand they buy; they just want them to hold.”
Imagination, of course, can open any door—turn the key
and let terror walk right in. Tuesday, at dawn, a carload of
pheasant hunters from Colorado—strangers, ignorant of
the local disaster—were startled by what they saw as they
crossed the prairies and passed through Holcomb:
windows ablaze, almost every window in almost every
house, and, in the brightly lit rooms, fully clothed people,
even entire families, who had sat the whole night wide
awake, watchful, listening. Of what were they frightened? “It
might happen again.” That, with variations, was the
customary response. However, one woman, a
schoolteacher, observed, “Feeling wouldn’t run half so high
if this had happened to anyone except the Clutters. Anyone
less admired. Prosperous. Secure. But that family
represented everything people hereabouts really value and
respect, and that such a thing could happen to them—well,
it’s like being told there is no God. It makes life seem
pointless. Idon’t think people are so much frightened as
they are deeply depressed.”
Another reason, the simplest, the ugliest, was that this
hitherto peaceful congregation of neighbors and old friends
had suddenly to endure the unique experience of distrusting
each other; understandably, they believed that the murderer
was among themselves, and, to the last man, endorsed an
opinion advanced by Arthur Clutter, a brother of the
deceased, who, while talking to journalists in the lobby of a
Garden City hotel on November 17, had said, “When this is
cleared up, I’ll wager whoever did it was someone within
ten miles of where we now stand.”
Approximately four hundred miles east of where Arthur
Clutter then stood, two young men were sharing a booth in
the Eagle Buffet, a Kansas City diner. One—narrow-faced,
and with a blue cat tattooed on his right hand—had
polished off several chicken-salad sandwiches and was
now eying his companion’s meal: an untouched hamburger
and a glass of root beer in which three aspirin were
dissolving.
“Perry, baby,” Dick said, “you don’t want that burger. I’ll take
it.”
Perry shoved the plate across the table. “Christ! Can’t you
let me concentrate?”
“You don’t have to read it fifty times.”
The reference was to a front-page article in the November
17 edition of the Kansas City Star. Headlined CLUES ARE
FEWIN SLAYING OF 4, the article, which was a follow-up of the
previous day’s initial announcement of the murders, ended
with a summarizing paragraph:
The investigators are left faced with a search for a killer
or killers whose cunning is apparent if his (or their) motive
is not. For this killer or killers: *Carefully cut the telephone
cords of the home’s two telephones. *Bound and gagged
their victims expertly, with no evidence of a struggle with
any of them. *Left nothing in the house amiss, left no
indication they had searched for anything with the possible
exception of [Clutter’s] billfold. *Shot four persons in
different parts of the house, calmly picking up the expended
shotgun shells. *Arrived and left the home, presumably with
the murder weapon, without being seen. *Acted without a
motive, if you care to discount an abortive robbery attempt,
which the investigators are wont to do.
“ ‘For this killer or killers,’ ” said Perry, reading aloud.
“That’s incorrect. The grammar is. It ought to be ‘For this
killer or these killers. ’ ” Sipping his aspirin-spiked root
beer, he went on, “Anyway, Idon’t believe it. Neither do you.
Own up, Dick. Be honest. You don’t believe this no-clue
stuff?”
Yesterday, after studying the papers, Perry had put the
same question, and Dick, who thought he’d disposed of it
(“Look. If those cowboys could make the slightest
connection, we’d have heard the sound of hoofs a hundred
miles off”), was bored at hearing it again. Too bored to
protest when Perry once more pursued the matter: “I’ve
always played my hunches. That’s why I’m alive today. You
know Willie-Jay? He said Iwas a natural-born ‘medium,’
and he knew about things like that, he was interested. He
said Ihad a high degree of ‘extrasensory perception.’ Sort
of like having built-in radar—you see things before you see
them. The outlines of coming events. Take, like, my brother
and his wife. Jimmy and his wife. They were crazy about
each other, but he was jealous as hell, and he made her so
miserable, being jealous and always thinking she was
passing it out behind his back, that she shot herself, and
the next day Jimmy put a bullet through his head. When it
happened—this was 1949, and Iwas in Alaska with Dad
up around Circle City—Itold Dad, ‘Jimmy’s dead.’ A week
later we got the news. Lord’s truth. Another time, over in
Japan, Iwas helping load a ship, and Isat down to rest a
minute. Suddenly a voice inside me said, ‘Jump!’ Ijumped I
guess maybe ten feet, and just then, right where I’d been
sitting, a ton of stuff came crashing down. Icould give you a
hundred examples. Idon’t care if you believe me or not. For
instance, right before Ihad my motorcycle accident Isaw
the whole thing happen: saw it in my mind—the rain, the
skid tracks, me lying there bleeding and my legs broken.
That’s what I’ve got now. A premonition. Something tells me
this is a trap.” He tapped the newspaper. “A lot of
prevarications.”
Dick ordered another hamburger. During the past few days
he’d known a hunger that nothing—three successive
steaks, a dozen Hershey bars, a pound of gumdrops—
seemed to interrupt. Perry, on the other hand, was without
appetite; he subsisted on root beer, aspirin, and cigarettes.
“No wonder you got leaps,” Dick told him. “Aw, come on,
baby. Get the bubbles out of your blood. We scored. It was
perfect.”
“I’m surprised to hear that, all things considered,” Perry
said. The quietness of his tone italicized the malice of his
reply. But Dick took it, even smiled—and his smile was a
skillful proposition. Here, it said, wearing a kid grin, was a
very personable character, clean-cut, affable, a fellow any
man might trust to shave him.
“O.K.,” Dick said. “Maybe Ihad some wrong information.”
“Hallelujah.”
“But on the whole it was perfect. We hit the ball right out of
the park. It’s lost. And it’s gonna stay lost. There isn’t a
single connection.”
“Ican think of one.”
Perry had gone too far. He went further: “Floyd—is that the
name?” A bit below the belt, but then Dick deserved it, his
confidence was like a kite that needed reeling in.
Nevertheless, Perry observed with some misgiving the
symptoms of fury rearranging Dick’s expression: jaw, lips,
the whole face slackened; saliva bubbles appeared at the
corners of his mouth. Well, if it came to a fight, Perry could
defend himself. He was short, several inches shorter than
Dick, and his runty, damaged legs were unreliable, but he
outweighed his friend, was thicker, had arms that could
squeeze the breath out of a bear. To prove it, however—
have a fight, a real falling-out—was far from desirable. Like
Dick or not (and he didn’t dislike Dick, though once he’d
liked him better, respected him more), it was obvious they
could not now safely separate. On that point they were in
accord, for Dick had said, “If we get caught, let’s get caught
together. Then we can back each other up. When they start
pulling the confession crap, saying you said and Isaid.”
Moreover, if he broke with Dick, it meant the end of plans
still attractive to Perry, and still, despite recent reverses,
deemed possible by both—a skin-diving, treasure-hunting
life lived together among islands or along coasts south of
the border.
Dick said, “Mr. Wells!” He picked up a fork. “It’d be worth it.
Like if Iwas nabbed on a check charge, it’d be worth it.
Just to get back in there.” The fork came down and stabbed
the table. “Right through the heart, honey.”
“I’m not saying he would,” said Perry, willing to make a
concession now that Dick’s anger had soared past him and
struck elsewhere. “He’d be too scared.”
“Sure,” said Dick. “Sure. He’d be too scared.” A marvel,
really, the ease with which Dick negotiated changes of
mood; in a trice, all trace of meanness, of sullen bravura,
had evaporated. He said, “About that premonition stuff. Tell
me this: If you were so damn sure you were gonna crack
up, why didn’t you call it quits? It wouldn’t have happened if
you’d stayed off your bike—right?”
That was a riddle that Perry had pondered. He felt he’d
solved it, but the solution, while simple, was also somewhat
hazy: “No. Because once a thing is set to happen, all you
can do is hope it won’t. Or will—depending. As long as you
live, there’s always something waiting, and even if it’s bad,
and you know it’s bad, what can you do? You can’t stop
living. Like my dream. Since Iwas a kid, I’ve had this same
dream. Where I’m in Africa. A jungle. I’m moving through
the trees toward a tree standing all alone. Jesus, it smells
bad, that tree; it kind of makes me sick, the way it stinks.
Only, it’s beautiful to look at—it has blue leaves and
diamonds hanging everywhere. Diamonds like oranges.
That’s why I’m there—to pick myself a bushel of diamonds.
But Iknow the minute Itry to, the minute Ireach up, a snake
is gonna fall on me. A snake that guards the tree. This fat
son of a bitch living in the branches. Iknow this beforehand,
see? And Jesus, Idon’t know how to fight a snake. But I
figure, Well, I’ll take my chances. What it comes down to is I
want the diamonds more than I’m afraid of the snake. So I
go to pick one, Ihave the diamond in my hand, I’m pulling at
it, when the snake lands on top of me. We wrestle around,
but he’s a slippery sonofabitch and Ican’t get a hold, he’s
crushing me, you can hear my legs cracking. Now comes
the part it makes me sweat even to think about. See, he
starts to swallow me. Feet first. Like going down in
quicksand.” Perry hesitated. He could not help noticing that
Dick, busy gouging under his fingernails with a fork prong,
was uninterested in his dream.
Dick said, “So? The snake swallows you? Or what?”
“Never mind. It’s not important.” (But it was! The finale was
of great importance, a source of private joy. He’d once told
it to his friend Willie-Jay; he had described to him the
towering bird, the yellow “sort of parrot.” Of course, Willie-
Jay was different—delicate-minded, “a saint.” He’d
understood. But Dick? Dick might laugh. And that Perry
could not abide: anyone’s ridiculing the parrot, which had
first flown into his dreams when he was seven years old, a
hated, hating half-breed child living in a California
orphanage run by nuns—shrouded disciplinarians who
whipped him for wetting his bed. It was after one of these
beatings, one he could never forget (“She woke me up. She
had a flashlight, and she hit me with it. Hit me and hit me.
And when the flashlight broke, she went on hitting me in the
dark”), that the parrot appeared, arrived while he slept, a
bird “taller than Jesus, yellow like a sunflower,” a warrior-
angel who blinded the nuns with its beak, fed upon their
eyes, slaughtered them as they “pleaded for mercy,” then
so gently lifted him, enfolded him, winged him away to
“paradise.”
As the years went by, the particular torments from which the
bird delivered him altered; others—older children, his
father, a faithless girl, a sergeant he’d known in the Army—
replaced the nuns, but the parrot remained, a hovering
avenger. Thus, the snake, that custodian of the diamond-
bearing tree, never finished devouring him but was itself
always devoured. And afterward the blessed ascent!
Ascension to a paradise that in one version was merely “a
feeling,” a sense of power, of unassailable superiority—
sensations that in another version were transposed into “A
real place. Like out of a movie. Maybe that’s where Idid
see it—remembered it from a movie. Because where else
would Ihave seen a garden like that? With white marble
steps? Fountains? And away down below, if you go to the
edge of the garden, you can see the ocean. Terrific! Like
around Carmel, California. The best thing, though—well, it’s
a long, long table. You never imagined so much food.
Oysters. Turkeys. Hot dogs. Fruit you could make into a
million fruit cups. And, listen—it’s every bit free. Imean, I
don’t have to be afraid to touch it. Ican eat as much as I
want, and it won’t cost a cent. That’s how Iknow where I
am.”)
Dick said, “I’m a normal. Ionly dream about blond chicken.
Speaking of which, you hear about the nanny goat’s
nightmare?” That was Dick—always ready with a dirty joke
on any subject. But he told the joke well, and Perry, though
he was in some measure a prude, could not help laughing,
as always.
Speaking of her friendship with Nancy Clutter, Susan
Kidwell said: “We were like sisters. At least, that’s how Ifelt
about her—as though she were my sister. Icouldn’t go to
school—not those first few days. Istayed out of school until
after the funeral. So did Bobby Rupp. For a while Bobby
and Iwere always together. He’s a nice boy—he has a
good heart—but nothing very terrible had ever happened to
him before. Like losing anyone he’d loved. And then, on top
of it, having to take a lie-detector test. Idon’t mean he was
bitter about that; he realized the police were doing what
they had to do. Some hard things, two or three, had already
happened to me, but not to him, so it was a shock when he
found out maybe life isn’t one long basketball game. Mostly,
we just drove around in his old Ford. Up and down the
highway. Out to the airport and back. Or we’d go to the
Cree-Mee—that’s a drive-in—and sit in the car, order a
Coke, listen to the radio. The radio was always playing; we
didn’t have anything to say ourselves. Except once in a
while Bobby said how much he’d loved Nancy, and how he
could never care about another girl. Well, Iwas sure Nancy
wouldn’t have wanted that, and Itold him so. Iremember—I
think it was Monday—we drove down to the river. We
parked on the bridge. You can see the house from there—
the Clutter house. And part of the land—Mr. Clutter’s fruit
orchard, and the wheat fields going away. Way off in one of
the fields a bonfire was burning; they were burning stuff
from the house. Everywhere you looked, there was
something to remind you. Men with nets and poles were
fishing along the banks of the river, but not fishing for fish.
Bobby said they were looking for the weapons. The knife.
The gun.
“Nancy loved the river. Summer nights we used to ride
double on Nancy’s horse, Babe—that old fat gray? Ride
straight to the river and right into the water. Then Babe
would wade along in the shallow part while we played our
flutes and sang. Got cool. Ikeep wondering, Gosh, what will
become of her? Babe. A lady from Garden City took
Kenyon’s dog. Took Teddy. He ran away—found his way
back to Holcomb. But she came and got him again. And I
have Nancy’s cat—Evinrude. But Babe. Isuppose they’ll
sell her. Wouldn’t Nancy hate that? Wouldn’t she be
furious? Another day, the day before the funeral, Bobby
and Iwere sitting by the railroad tracks. Watching the trains
go by. Real stupid. Like sheep in a blizzard. When suddenly
Bobby woke up and said, ‘We ought to go see Nancy. We
ought to be with her.’ So we drove to Garden City—went to
the Phillips’ Funeral Home, there on Main Street. Ithink
Bobby’s kid brother was with us. Yes, I’m sure he was.
Because Iremember we picked him up after school. And I
remember he said how there wasn’t going to be any school
the next day, so all the Holcomb kids could go to the
funeral. And he kept telling us what the kids thought. He
said the kids were convinced it was the work of ‘a hired
killer.’ Ididn’t want to hear about it. Just gossip and talk—
everything Nancy despised. Anyway, Idon’t much care who
did it. Somehow it seems beside the point. My friend is
gone. Knowing who killed her isn’t going to bring her back.
What else matters? They wouldn’t let us. At the funeral
parlor, Imean. They said no one could ‘view the family.’
Except the relatives. But Bobby insisted, and finally the
undertaker—he knew Bobby, and, Iguess, felt sorry for him
—he said all right, be quiet about it, but come on in. Now I
wish we hadn’t.”
The four coffins, which quite filled the small, flower-crowded
parlor, were to be sealed at the funeral services—very
understandably, for despite the care taken with the
appearance of the victims, the effect achieved was
disquieting. Nancy wore her dress of cherry-red velvet, her
brother a bright plaid shirt; the parents were more sedately
attired, Mr. Clutter in navy-blue flannel, his wife in navy-blue
crepe; and—and it was this, especially, that lent the scene
an awful aura—the head of each was completely encased
in cotton, a swollen cocoon twice the size of an ordinary
blown-up balloon, and the cotton, because it had been
sprayed with a glossy substance, twinkled like Christmas-
tree snow.
Susan at once retreated. “Iwent outside and waited in the
car,” she recalled. “Across the street a man was raking
leaves. Ikept looking at him. Because Ididn’t want to close
my eyes. Ithought, If Ido I’ll faint. So Iwatched him rake
leaves and burn them. Watched, without really seeing him.
Because all Icould see was the dress. Iknew it so well. I
helped her pick the material. It was her own design, and
she sewed it herself. Iremember how excited she was the
first time she wore it. At a party. All Icould see was Nancy’s
red velvet. And Nancy in it. Dancing.”
The Kansas City Star printed a lengthy account of the
Clutter funeral, but the edition containing the article was two
days old before Perry, lying abed in a hotel room, got
around to reading it. Even so, he merely skimmed through,
skipped about among the paragraphs: “A thousand
persons, the largest crowd in the five-year history of the
First Methodist Church, attended services for the four
victims today. . . . Several classmates of Nancy’s from
Holcomb High School wept as the Reverend Leonard
Cowan said: ‘God offers us courage, love and hope even
though we walk through the shadows of the valley of death.
I’m sure he was with them in their last hours. Jesus has
never promised us we would not suffer pain or sorrow but
He has always said He would be there to help us bear the
sorrow and the pain. . . .’ On the unseasonably warm day,
about six hundred persons went to the Valley View
Cemetery on the north edge of this city. There, at graveside
services, they recited the Lord’s Prayer. Their voices,
massed together in a low whisper, could be heard
throughout the cemetery.”
A thousand people! Perry was impressed. He wondered
how much the funeral had cost. Money was greatly on his
mind, though not as relentlessly as it had been earlier in the
day—a day he’d begun “without the price of a cat’s miaow.”
The situation had improved since then; thanks to Dick, he
and Dick now possessed “a pretty fair stake”—enough to
get them to Mexico.
Dick! Smooth. Smart. Yes, you had to hand it to him. Christ,
it was incredible how he could “con a guy.” Like the clerk in
the Kansas City, Missouri, clothing store, the first of the
places Dick had decided to “hit.” As for Perry, he’d never
tried to “pass a check.” He was nervous, but Dick told him,
“All Iwant you to do is stand there. Don’t laugh, and don’t
be surprised at anything Isay. You got to play these things
by ear.” For the task proposed, it seemed, Dick had perfect
pitch. He breezed in, breezily introduced Perry to the clerk
as “a friend of mine about to get married,” and went on, “I’m
his best man. Helping him kind of shop around for the
clothes he’ll want. Haha, what you might say his—ha-ha—
trousseau.” The salesman “ate it up,” and soon Perry,
stripped of his denim trousers, was trying on a gloomy suit
that the clerk considered “ideal for an informal ceremony.”
After commenting on the customer’s oddly proportioned
figure—the oversized torso supported by the undersized
legs—he added, “I’m afraid we haven’t anything that would
fit without alteration.” Oh, said Dick, that was O.K., there
was plenty of time—the wedding was “a week tomorrow.”
That settled, they then selected a gaudy array of jackets
and slacks regarded as appropriate for what was to be,
according to Dick, a Florida honeymoon. “You know the
Eden Roc?” Dick said to the salesman. “In Miami Beach?
They got reservations. A present from her folks—two
weeks at forty bucks a day. How about that? An ugly runt
like him, he’s making it with a honey she’s not only built but
loaded. While guys like you and me, good-lookin’ guys . . .”
The clerk presented the bill. Dick reached in his hip pocket,
frowned, snapped his fingers, and said, “Hot damn! Iforgot
my wallet.” Which to his partner seemed a ploy so feeble
that it couldn’t possibly “fool a day-old nigger.” The clerk,
apparently, was not of that opinion, for he produced a blank
check, and when Dick made it out for eighty dollars more
than the bill totaled, instantly paid over the difference in
cash.
Outside, Dick said, “So you’re going to get married next
week? Well, you’ll need a ring.” Moments later, riding in
Dick’s aged Chevrolet, they arrived at a store named Best
Jewelry. From there, after purchasing by check a diamond
engagement ring and a diamond wedding band, they drove
to a pawnshop to dispose of these items. Perry was sorry
to see them go. He’d begun to half credit the make-believe
bride, though in his conception of her, as opposed to
Dick’s, she was not rich, not beautiful; rather, she was
nicely groomed, gently spoken, was conceivably “a college
graduate,” in any event “a very intellectual type”—a sort of
girl he’d always wanted to meet but in fact never had.
Unless you counted Cookie, the nurse he’d known when he
was hospitalized as a result of his motorcycle accident. A
swell kid, Cookie, and she had liked him, pitied him,
babied him, inspired him to read “serious literature”—Gone
with the Wind, This Is My Beloved. Sexual episodes of a
strange and stealthy nature had occurred, and love had
been mentioned, and marriage, too, but eventually, when
his injuries had mended, he’d told her goodbye and given
her, by way of explanation, a poem he pretended to have
written:
There’s a race of men that don’t fit in,
A race that can’t stay still;
So they break the hearts of kith and kin;
And they roam the world at will.
They range the field and they rove the flood,
And they climb the mountain’s crest;
Theirs is the curse of the gypsy blood,
And they don’t know how to rest.
If they just went straight they might go far;
They are strong and brave and true;
But they’re always tired of the things that are,
And they want the strange and new.
He had not seen her again, or ever heard from or of her, yet
several years later he’d had her name tattooed on his arm,
and once, when Dick asked who “Cookie” was, he’d said,
“Nobody. A girl Ialmost married.” (That Dick had been
married—married twice—and had fathered three sons was
something he envied. A wife, children—those were
experiences “a man ought to have,” even if, as with Dick,
they didn’t “make him happy or do him any good.”)
The rings were pawned for a hundred and fifty dollars. They
visited another jewelry store, Goldman’s, and sauntered out
of there with a man’s gold wristwatch. Next stop, an Elko
Camera Store, where they “bought” an elaborate motion-
picture camera. “Cameras are your best investment,” Dick
informed Perry. “Easiest thing to hock or sell. Cameras and
TV sets.” This being the case, they decided to obtain
several of the latter, and, having completed the mission,
went on to attack a few more clothing emporiums—
Sheperd & Foster’s, Rothschild’s, Shopper’s Paradise. By
sundown, when the stores were closing, their pockets were
filled with cash and the car was heaped with salable,
pawnable wares. Surveying this harvest of shirts and
cigarette lighters, expensive machinery and cheap cuff
links, Perry felt elatedly tall—now Mexico, a new chance, a
“really living” life. But Dick seemed depressed. He
shrugged off Perry’s praises (“Imean it, Dick. You were
amazing. Half the time Ibelieved you myself”). And Perry
was puzzled; he could not fathom why Dick, usually so full of
himself, should suddenly, when he had good cause to gloat,
be meek, look wilted and sad. Perry said, “I’ll stand you a
drink.”
They stopped at a bar. Dick drank three Orange Blossoms.
After the third, he abruptly asked, “What about Dad? Ifeel
—oh, Jesus, he’s such a good old guy. And my mother—
well, you saw her. What about them? Me, I’ll be off in
Mexico. Or wherever. But they’ll be right here when those
checks start to bounce. Iknow Dad. He’ll want to make
them good. Like he tried to before. And he can’t—he’s old
and he’s sick, he ain’t got anything.”
“Isympathize with that,” said Perry truthfully. Without being
kind, he was sentimental, and Dick’s affection for his
parents, his professed concern for them, did indeed touch
him. “But hell, Dick. It’s very simple,” Perry said. “We can
pay off the checks. Once we’re in Mexico, once we get
started down there, we’ll make money. Lots of it.”
“How?”
“How?”—what could Dick mean? The question dazed
Perry. After all, such a rich assortment of ventures had been
discussed. Prospecting for gold, skin-diving for sunken
treasure—these were but two of the projects Perry had
ardently proposed. And there were others. The boat, for
instance. They had often talked of a deep-sea-fishing boat,
which they would buy, man themselves, and rent to
vacationers—this though neither had ever skippered a
canoe or hooked a guppy. Then, too, there was quick
money to be made chauffeuring stolen cars across South
American borders. (“You get paid five hundred bucks a
trip,” or so Perry had read somewhere.) But of the many
replies he might have made, he chose to remind Dick of
the fortune awaiting them on Cocos Island, a land speck off
the coast of Costa Rica. “No fooling, Dick,” Perry said.
“This is authentic. I’ve got a map. I’ve got the whole history.
It was buried there back in 1821—Peruvian bullion, jewelry.
Sixty million dollars—that’s what they say it’s worth. Even if
we didn’t find all of it, even if we found only some of it—Are
you with me, Dick?” Heretofore, Dick had always
encouraged him, listened attentively to his talk of maps,
tales of treasure, but now—and it had not occurred to him
before—he wondered if all along Dick had only been
pretending, just kidding him.
The thought, acutely painful, passed, for Dick, with a wink
and a playful jab, said, “Sure, honey. I’m with you. All the
way.”
It was three in the morning, and the telephone rang again.
Not that the hour mattered. Al Dewey was wide awake
anyway, and so were Marie and their sons, nine-year-old
Paul and twelve-year-old Alvin Adams Dewey, Jr. For who
could sleep in a house—a modest one-story house-where
all night the telephone had been sounding every few
minutes? As he got out of bed, Dewey promised his wife,
“This time I’ll leave it off the hook.” But it was not a promise
he dared keep. True, many of the calls came from news-
hunting journalists, or would-be humorists, or theorists (“Al?
Listen, fella, I’ve got this deal figured. It’s suicide and
murder. Ihappen to knowHerb was in a bad way financially.
He was spread pretty thin. So what does he do? He takes
out this big insurance policy, shoots Bonnie and the kids,
and kills himself with a bomb. A hand grenade stuffed with
buckshot”), or anonymous persons with poison-pen minds
(“Know them Ls? Foreigners? Don’t work? Give parties?
Serve cocktails? Where’s the money come from? Wouldn’t
surprise me a darn if they ain’t at the roots of this Clutter
trouble”), or nervous ladies alarmed by the gossip going
around, rumors that knew neither ceiling nor cellar (“Alvin,
now, I’ve known you since you were a boy. And Iwant you to
tell me straight out whether it’s so. Iloved and respected
Mr. Clutter, and Irefuse to believe that that man, that
Christian—Irefuse to believe he was chasing after women.
. .”).
But most of those who telephoned were responsible
citizens wanting to be helpful (“Iwonder if you’ve
interviewed Nancy’s friend, Sue Kidwell? Iwas talking to
the child, and she said something that struck me. She said
the last time she ever spoke to Nancy, Nancy told her Mr.
Clutter was in a real bad mood. Had been the past three
weeks. That she thought he was very worried about
something, so worried he’d taken to smoking
cigarettes . . .”). Either that or the callers were people
officially concerned—law officers and sheriffs from other
parts of the state (“This may be something, may not, but a
bartender here says he overheard two fellows discussing
the case in terms made it sound like they had a lot to do
with it . . .”). And while none of these conversations had as
yet done more than make extra work for the investigators, it
was always possible that the next one might be, as Dewey
put it, “the break that brings down the curtain.”
On answering the present call, Dewey immediately heard “I
want to confess.”
He said, “To whom am Ispeaking, please?”
The caller, a man, repeated his original assertion, and
added, “Idid it. Ikilled them all.”
“Yes,” said Dewey. “Now, if Icould have your name and
address . . .”
“Oh, no, you don’t,” said the man, his voice thick with
inebriated indignation. “I’m not going to tell you anything.
Not till Iget the reward. You send the reward, then I’ll tell you
who Iam. That’s final.”
Dewey went back to bed. “No, honey,” he said. “Nothing
important. Just another drunk.”
“What did he want?”
“Wanted to confess. Provided we sent the reward first.” (A
Kansas paper, the Hutchinson News, had offered a
thousand dollars for information leading to the solution of
the crime.)
“Alvin, are you lighting another cigarette? Honestly, Alvin,
can’t you at least try to sleep?”
He was too tense to sleep, even if the telephone could be
silenced—too fretful and frustrated. None of his “leads” had
led anywhere, except, perhaps, down a blind alley toward
the blankest of walls. Bobby Rupp? The polygraph machine
had eliminated Bobby. And Mr. Smith, the farmer who tied
rope knots identical with those used by the murderer—he,
too, was a discarded suspect, having established that on
the night of the crime he’d been “off in Oklahoma.” Which
left the Johns, father and son, but they had also submitted
provable alibis. “So,” to quote Harold Nye, “it all adds up to
a nice round number. Zero.” Even the hunt for the grave of
Nancy’s cat had come to nothing.
Nevertheless, there had been one or two meaningful
developments. First, while sorting Nancy’s clothes, Mrs.
Elaine Selsor, her aunt, had found tucked in the toe of a
shoe a gold wristwatch. Second, accompanied by a K.B.I.
agent, Mrs. Helm had explored every room at River Valley
Farm, toured the house in the expectation that she might
notice something awry or absent, and she had. It happened
in Kenyon’s room. Mrs. Helm looked and looked, paced
round and round the room with pursed lips, touching this
and that—Kenyon’s old baseball mitt, Kenyon’s mud-
spattered work boots, his pathetic abandoned spectacles.
All the while she kept whispering, “Something here is
wrong, Ifeel it, Iknow it, but Idon’t know what it is.” And
then she did know. “It’s the radio! Where is Kenyon’s little
radio?”
Taken together, these discoveries forced Dewey to
consider again the possibility of “plain robbery” as a
motive. Surely that watch had not tumbled into Nancy’s
shoe by accident? She must, lying there in the dark, have
heard sounds—footfalls, perhaps voices—that led her to
suppose thieves were in the house, and so believing must
have hurriedly hidden the watch, a gift from her father that
she treasured. As for the radio, a gray portable made by
Zenith—no doubt about it, the radio was gone. All. the
same, Dewey could not accept the theory that the family
had been slaughtered for paltry profit—“a few dollars and a
radio.” To accept it would obliterate his image of the killer
—or, rather, killers. He and his associates had definitely
decided to pluralize the term. The expert execution of the
crimes was proof enough that at least one of the pair
commanded an immoderate amount of coolheaded
slyness, and was—must be—a person too clever to have
done such a deed without calculated motive. Then, too,
Dewey had become aware of several particulars that
reinforced his conviction that at least one of the murderers
was emotionally involved with the victims, and felt for them,
even as he destroyed them, a certain twisted tenderness.
How else explain the mattress box?
The business of the mattress box was one of the things that
most tantalized Dewey. Why had the murderers taken the
trouble to move the box from the far end of the basement
room and lay it on the floor in front of the furnace, unless the
intention had been to make Mr. Clutter more comfortable—
to provide him, while he contemplated the approaching
knife, with a couch less rigid than cold cement? And in
studying the death-scene photographs Dewey had
distinguished other details that seemed to support his
notion of a murderer now and again moved by considerate
impulses. “Or”—he could never quite find the word he
wanted—“something fussy. And soft. Those bedcovers.
Now, what kind of person would do that—tie up two women,
the way Bonnie and the girl were tied, and then draw up the
bedcovers, tuck them in, like sweet dreams and good
night? Or the pillow under Kenyon’s head. At first Ithought
maybe the pillow was put there to make his head a simpler
target. Now Ithink, No, it was done for the same reason the
mattress box was spread on the floor—to make the victim
more comfortable.”
But speculations such as these, though they absorbed
Dewey, did not gratify him or give him a sense of “getting
somewhere.” A case was seldom solved by “fancy
theories”; he put his faith in facts—“sweated for and sworn
to.” The quantity of facts to be sought and sifted, and the
agenda planned to obtain them, promised perspiration
aplenty, entailing, as it did, the tracking down, the “checking
out,” of hundreds of people, among them all former River
Valley Farm employees, friends and family, anyone with
whom Mr. Clutter had done business, much or little—a
tortoise crawl into the past. For, as Dewey had told his
team, “we have to keep going till we know the Clutters
better than they ever knew themselves. Until we see the
connection between what we found last Sunday morning
and something that happened maybe five years ago. The
link. Got to be one. Got to.”
Dewey’s wife dozed, but she awakened when she felt him
leave their bed, heard him once more answering the
telephone, and heard, from the nearby room where her
sons slept, sobs, a small boy crying. “Paul?” Ordinarily,
Paul was neither troubled nor troublesome—not a whiner,
ever. He was too busy digging tunnels in the backyard or
practicing to be “the fastest runner in Finney County.” But at
breakfast that morning he’d burst into tears. His mother had
not needed to ask him why; she knew that although he
understood only hazily the reasons for the uproar round him,
he felt endangered by it—by the harassing telephone, and
the strangers at the door, and his father’s worry-wearied
eyes. She went to comfort Paul. His brother, three years
older, helped. “Paul,” he said, “you take it easy now, and
tomorrow I’ll teach you to play poker.”
Dewey was in the kitchen; Marie, searching for him, found
him there, waiting for a pot of coffee to percolate and with
the murder-scene photographs spread before him on the
kitchen table—bleak stains, spoiling the table’s pretty fruit-
patterned oilcloth. (Once he had offered to let her look at
the pictures. She had declined. She had said, “Iwant to
remember Bonnie the way Bonnie was—and all of them.”)
He said, “Maybe the boys ought to stay with Mother.” His
mother, a widow, lived not far off, in a house she thought
too spacious and silent; the grandchildren were always
welcome. “For just a few days. Until—well, until.”
“Alvin, do you think we’ll ever get back to normal living?”
Mrs. Dewey asked.
Their normal life was like this: both worked, Mrs. Dewey as
an office secretary, and they divided between them the
household chores, taking turns at the stove and the sink.
(“When Alvin was sheriff, Iknow some of the boys teased
him. Used to say, ‘Lookayonder! Here comes Sheriff
Dewey! Tough guy! Totes a six-shooter! But once he gets
home, off comes the gun and on goes the apron!”) At that
time they were saving to build a house on a farm that
Dewey had bought in 1951—two hundred and forty acres
several miles north of Garden City. If the weather was fine,
and especially when the days were hot and the wheat was
high and ripe, he liked to drive out there and practice his
draw—shoot crows, tin cans—or in his imagination roam
through the house he hoped to have, and through the
garden he meant to plant, and under trees yet to be
seeded. He was very certain that some day his own oasis
of oaks and elms would stand upon those shadeless plains:
“Some day. God willing.”
A belief in God and the rituals surrounding that belief—
church every Sunday, grace before meals, prayers before
bed—were an important part of the Deweys’ existence. “I
don’t see how anyone can sit down to table without wanting
to bless it,” Mrs. Dewey once said. “Sometimes, when I
come home from work—well, I’m tired. But there’s always
coffee on the stove, and sometimes a steak in the icebox.
The boys make a fire to cook the steak, and we talk, and
tell each other our day, and by the time supper’s ready I
know we have good cause to be happy and grateful. So I
say, Thank you, Lord. Not just because Ishould—because I
want to.”
Now Mrs. Dewey said, “Alvin, answer me. Do you think we’ll
ever have a normal life again?”
He started to reply, but the telephone stopped him.
The old Chevrolet left Kansas City November 21, Saturday
night. Luggage was lashed to the fenders and roped to the
roof; the trunk was so stuffed it could not be shut; inside, on
the back seat, two television sets stood, one atop the other.
It was a tight fit for the passengers: Dick, who was driving,
and Perry, who sat clutching the old Gibson guitar, his most
beloved possession. As for Perry’s other belongings—a
cardboard suitcase, a gray Zenith portable radio, a gallon
jug of root-beer syrup (he feared that his favorite beverage
might not be available in Mexico), and two big boxes
containing books, manuscripts, cherished memorabilia
(and hadn’t Dick raised hell! Cursed, kicked the boxes,
called them “five hundred pounds of pig slop!”)—these, too,
were part of the car’s untidy interior.
Around midnight they crossed the border into Oklahoma.
Perry, glad to be out of Kansas, at last relaxed. Now it was
true—they were on their way—On their way, and never
coming back—without regret, as far as he was concerned,
for he was leaving nothing behind, and no one who might
deeply wonder into what thin air he’d spiraled. The same
could not be said of Dick. There were those Dick claimed
to love: three sons, a mother, a father, a brother—persons
he hadn’t dared confide his plans to, or bid goodbye,
though he never expected to see them again—not in this
life.
CLUTTER—ENGLISH VOWS GIVENIN SATURDAY CEREMONY: that
headline, appearing on the social page of the Garden City
Telegram for November 23, surprised many of its readers.
It seemed that Beverly, the second of Mr. Clutter’s surviving
daughters, had married Mr. Vere Edward English, the
young biology student to whom she had long been
engaged. Miss Clutter had worn white, and the wedding, a
full-scale affair (“Mrs. Leonard Cowan was soloist, and Mrs.
Howard Blanchard organist”), had been “solemnized at the
First Methodist Church”—the church in which, three days
earlier, the bride had formally mourned her parents, her
brother, and her younger sister. However, according to the
Telegram’s account, “Vere and Beverly had planned to be
married at Christmastime. The invitations were printed and
her father had reserved the church for that date. Due to the
unexpected tragedy and because of the many relatives
being here from distant places, the young couple decided
to have their wedding Saturday.”
The wedding over, the Clutter kinfolk dispersed. On
Monday, the day the last of them left Garden City, the
Telegram featured on its front page a letter written by Mr.
Howard Fox, of Oregon, Illinois, a brother of Bonnie Clutter.
The letter, after expressing gratitude to the townspeople for
having opened their “homes and hearts” to the bereaved
family, turned into a plea. “There is much resentment in this
community [that is, Garden City],” wrote Mr. Fox. “Ihave
even heard on more than one occasion that the man, when
found, should be hanged from the nearest tree. Let us not
feel this way. The deed is done and taking another life
cannot change it. Instead, let us forgive as God would have
us do. It is not right that we should hold a grudge in our
hearts. The doer of this act is going to find it very difficult
indeed to live with himself. His only peace of mind will be
when he goes to God for forgiveness. Let us not stand in
the way but instead give prayers that he may find his
peace.”
The car was parked on a promontory where Perry and
Dick had stopped to picnic. It was noon. Dick scanned the
view through a pair of binoculars. Mountains. Hawks
wheeling in a white sky. A dusty road winding into and out
of a white and dusty village. Today was his second day in
Mexico, and so far he liked it fine—even the food. (At this
very moment he was eating a cold, oily tortilla.) They had
crossed the border at Laredo, Texas, the morning of
November 23, and spent the first night in a San Luis Potosí
brothel. They were now two hundred miles north of their next
destination, Mexico City.
“Know what Ithink?” said Perry. “Ithink there must be
something wrong with us. To do what we did.”
“Did what?”
“Out there.”
Dick dropped the binoculars into a leather case, a luxurious
receptacle initialed H.W.C. He was annoyed. Annoyed as
hell. Why the hell couldn’t Perry shut up? Christ Jesus, what
damn good did it do, always dragging the goddam thing
up? It really was annoying. Especially since they’d agreed,
sort of, not to talk about the goddam thing. Just forget it.
“There’s got to be something wrong with somebody who’d
do a thing like that,” Perry said.
“Deal me out, baby,” Dick said. “I’m a normal.” And Dick
meant what he said. He thought himself as balanced, as
sane as anyone—maybe a bit smarter than the average
fellow, that’s all. But Perry—there was, in Dick’s opinion,
“something wrong” with Little Perry. To say the least. Last
spring, when they had celled together at Kansas State
Penitentiary, he’d learned most of Perry’s lesser
peculiarities: Perry could be “such a kid,” always wetting his
bed and crying in his sleep (“Dad, Ibeen looking
everywhere, where you been, Dad?”), and often Dick had
seen him “sit for hours just sucking his thumb and poring
over them phony damn treasure guides.” Which was one
side; there were others. In some ways old Perry was
“spooky as hell.” Take, for instance, that temper of his. He
could slide into a fury “quicker than ten drunk Indians.” And
yet you wouldn’t know it. “He might be ready to kill you, but
you’d never know it, not to look at or listen to,” Dick once
said. For however extreme the inward rage, outwardly
Perry remained a cool young tough, with eyes serene and
slightly sleepy. The time had been when Dick had thought
he could control, could regulate the temperature of these
sudden cold fevers that burned and chilled his friend. He
had been mistaken, and in the aftermath of that discovery,
had grown very unsure of Perry, not at all certain what to
think—except that he felt he ought to be afraid of him, and
wondered really why he wasn’t.
“Deep down,” Perry continued, “way, way rock-bottom, I
never thought Icould do it. A thing like that.”
“How about the nigger?” Dick said. Silence. Dick realized
that Perry was staring at him. A week ago, in Kansas City,
Perry had bought a pair of dark glasses—fancy ones with
silver-lacquered rims and mirrored lenses. Dick disliked
them; he’d told Perry he was ashamed to be seen with
“anyone who’d wear that kind of flit stuff.” Actually, what
irked him was the mirrored lenses; it was unpleasant
having Perry’s eyes hidden behind the privacy of those
tinted, reflecting surfaces.
“But a nigger,” said Perry. “That’s different.”
The comment, the reluctance with which it was pronounced,
made Dick ask, “Or did you? Kill him like you said?” It was
a significant question, for his original interest in Perry, his
assessment of Perry’s character and potentialities, was
founded on the story Perry had once told him of how he had
beaten a colored man to death.
“Sure Idid. Only—a nigger. It’s not the same.” Then Perry
said, “Know what it is that really bugs me? About the other
thing? It’s just Idon’t believe it—that anyone can get away
with a thing like that. Because Idon’t see how it’s possible.
To do what we did. And just one hundred percent get away
with it. Imean, that’s what bugs me—Ican’t get it out of my
head that something’s got to happen.”
Though as a child he had attended church, Dick had never
“come near” a belief in God; nor was he troubled by
superstitions. Unlike Perry, he was not convinced that a
broken mirror meant seven years’ misfortune, or that a
young moon if glimpsed through glass portended evil. But
Perry, with his sharp and scratchy intuitions, had hit upon
Dick’s one abiding doubt. Dick, too, suffered moments
when that question circled inside his head: Was it possible
—were the two of them “honest to God going to get away
with doing a thing like that”? Suddenly, he said to Perry,
“Now, just shut up!” Then he gunned the motor and backed
the car off the promontory. Ahead of him, on the dusty road,
he saw a dog trotting along in the warm sunshine.
Mountains. Hawks wheeling in a white sky.
When Perry asked Dick, “Know what Ithink?” he knew he
was beginning a conversation that would displease Dick,
and one that, for that matter, he himself would just as soon
avoid. He agreed with Dick: Why go on talking about it? But
he could not always stop himself. Spells of helplessness
occurred, moments when he “remembered things”—blue
light exploding in a black room, the glass eyes of a big toy
bear—and when voices, a particular few words, started
nagging his mind: “Oh, no! Oh, please! No! No! No! No!
Don’t! Oh, please don’t, please!” And certain sounds
returned—a silver dollar rolling across a floor, boot steps
on hardwood stairs, and the sounds of breathing, the
gasps, the hysterical inhalations of a man with a severed
windpipe.
When Perry said, “Ithink there must be something wrong
with us,” he was making an admission he “hated to make.”
After all, it was “painful” to imagine that one might be “not
just right”—particularly if whatever was wrong was not your
own fault but “maybe a thing you were born with.” Look at
his family! Look at what had happened there! His mother,
an alcoholic, had strangled to death on her own vomit. Of
her children, two sons and two daughters, only the younger
girl, Barbara, had entered ordinary life, married, begun
raising a family. Fern, the other daughter, jumped out of a
window of a San Francisco hotel. (Perry had ever since
“tried to believe she slipped,” for he’d loved Fern. She was
“such a sweet person,” so “artistic,” a “terrific” dancer, and
she could sing, too. “If she’d ever had any luck at all, with
her looks and all, she could have got somewhere, been
somebody.” It was sad to think of her climbing over a
window sill and falling fifteen floors.) And there was Jimmy,
the older boy—Jimmy, who had one day driven his wife to
suicide and killed himself the next.
Then he heard Dick say, “Deal me out, baby. I’m a normal.”
Wasn’t that a horse’s laugh? But never mind, let it pass.
“Deep down,” Perry continued, “way, way rock-bottom, I
never thought Icould do it. A thing like that.” And at once he
recognized his error: Dick would, of course, answer by
asking, “How about the nigger?” When he’d told Dick that
story, it was because he’d wanted Dick’s friendship,
wanted Dick to “respect” him, think him “hard,” as much “the
masculine type” as he had considered Dick to be. And so
one day after they had both read and were discussing a
Reader’s Digest article entitled “How Good a Character
Detective Are You?” (“As you wait in a dentist’s office or a
railway station, try studying the give-away signs in people
around you. Watch the way they walk, for example. A stiff-
legged gait can reveal a rigid, unbending personality; a
shambling walk a lack of determination”), Perry had said
“I’ve always been an outstanding character detective,
otherwise I’d be dead today. Like if Icouldn’t judge when to
trust somebody. You never can much. But I’ve come to trust
you, Dick. You’ll see Ido, because I’m going to put myself in
your power. I’m going to tell you something Inever told
anybody. Not even Willie-Jay. About the time Ifixed a guy.”
And Perry saw, as he went on, that Dick was interested; he
was really listening. “It was a couple of summers ago. Out in
Vegas. Iwas living in this old boarding house—it used to
be a fancy cathouse. But all the fancy was gone. It was a
place they should have torn down ten years back; anyway, it
was sort of coming down by itself. The cheapest rooms
were in the attic, and Ilived up there. So did this nigger. His
name was King; he was a transient. We were the only two
up there—us and a million cucarachas. King, he wasn’t too
young, but he’d done roadwork and other outdoor stuff—he
had a good build. He wore glasses, and he read a lot. He
never shut his door. Every time Ipassed by, he was always
lying there buck-naked. He was out of work, and said he’d
saved a few dollars from his last job, said he wanted to stay
in bed awhile, read and fan himself and drink beer. The
stuff he read, it was just junk—comic books and cowboy
junk. He was O.K. Sometimes we’d have a beer together,
and once he lent me ten dollars. Ihad no cause to hurt him.
But one night we were sitting in the attic, it was so hot you
couldn’t sleep, so Isaid, ‘Come on, King, let’s go for a
drive.’ Ihad an old car I’d stripped and souped and painted
silver—the Silver Ghost, Icalled it. We went for a long drive.
Drove way out in the desert. Out there it was cool. We
parked and drank a few more beers. King got out of the
car, and Ifollowed after him. He didn’t see I’d picked up this
chain. A bicycle chain Ikept under the seat. Actually, Ihad
no real idea to do it till Idid it. Ihit him across the face.
Broke his glasses. Ikept right on. Afterward, Ididn’t feel a
thing. Ileft him there, and never heard a word about it.
Maybe nobody ever found him. Just buzzards.”
There was some truth in the story. Perry had known, under
the circumstances stated, a Negro named King. But if the
man was dead today it was none of Perry’s doing; he’d
never raised a hand against him. For all he knew, King
might still be lying abed somewhere, fanning himself and
sipping beer.
“Or did you? Kill him like you said?” Dick asked.
Perry was not a gifted liar, or a prolific one; however, once
he had told a fiction he usually stuck by it. “Sure Idid. Only
—a nigger. It’s not the same.” Presently, he said, “Know
what it is that really bugs me? About that other thing? It’s
just Idon’t believe it—that anyone can get away with a thing
like that.” And he suspected that Dick didn’t, either. For
Dick was at least partly inhabited by Perry’s mystical-moral
apprehensions. Thus: “Now, just shut up!”
The car was moving. A hundred feet ahead, a dog trotted
along the side of the road. Dick swerved toward it. It was an
old half-dead mongrel, brittle-boned and mangy, and the
impact, as it met the car, was little more than what a bird
might make. But Dick was satisfied. “Boy!” he said—and it
was what he always said after running down a dog, which
was something he did whenever the opportunity arose.
“Boy! We sure splattered him!”
Thanksgiving passed, and the pheasant season came to a
halt, but not the beautiful Indian summer, with its flow of
clear, pure days. The last of the out-of-town newsmen,
convinced that the case was never going to be solved, left
Garden City. But the case was by no means closed for the
people of Finney County, and least of all for those who
patronized Holcomb’s favorite meeting place, Hartman’s
Café.
“Since the trouble started, we’ve been doing all the
business we can handle,” Mrs. Hartman said, gazing
around her snug domain, every scrap of which was being
sat or stood or leaned upon by tobacco-scented, coffee-
drinking farmers, farm helpers, and ranch hands. “Just a
bunch of old women,” added Mrs. Hartman’s cousin,
Postmistress Clare, who happened to be on the premises.
“If it was spring and work to be done, they wouldn’t be here.
But wheat’s in, winter’s on the way, they got nothing to do
but sit around and scare each other. You know Bill Brown,
down to the Telegram? See the editorial he wrote? That
one he called it ‘Another Crime’? Said, ‘It’s time for
everyone to stop wagging loose tongues.’ Because that’s a
crime, too—telling plain-out lies. But what can you expect?
Look around you. Rattlesnakes. Varmints. Rumormongers.
See anything else? Ha! Like dash you do.”
One rumor originating in Hartman’s Café involved Taylor
Jones, a rancher whose property adjoins River Valley
Farm. In the opinion of a good part of the café’s clientele,
Mr. Jones and his family, not the Clutters, were the
murderer’s intended victims. “It makes harder sense,”
argued one of those who held this view. “Taylor Jones, he’s
a richer man than Herb Clutter ever was. Now, pretend the
fellow who done it wasn’t anyone from hereabouts. Pretend
he’d been maybe hired to kill, and all he had was
instructions on how to get to the house. Well, it would be
mighty easy to make a mistake—take a wrong turn—and
end up at Herb’s place ’stead of Taylor’s.” The “Jones
Theory” was much repeated—especially to the Joneses, a
dignified and sensible family, who refused to be flustered.
A lunch counter, a few tables, an alcove harboring a hot grill
and an icebox and a radio—that’s all there is to Hartman’s
Café. “But our customers like it,” says the proprietress. “Got
to. Nowhere else for them to go. ’Less they drive seven
miles one direction or fifteen the other. Anyway, we run a
friendly place, and the coffee’s good since Mable came to
work”—Mabel being Mrs. Helm. “After the tragedy, Isaid,
‘Mabel, now that you’re out of a job, why don’t you come
give me a hand at the café. Cook a little. Wait counter.’
How it turned out—the only bad feature is, everybody
comes in here, they pester her with questions. About the
tragedy. But Mabel’s not like Cousin Myrt. Or me. She’s
shy. Besides, she doesn’t know anything special. No more
than anybody else.” But by and large the Hartman
congregation continued to suspect that Mabel Helm knew a
thing or two that she was holding back. And, of course, she
did. Dewey had had several conversations with her and
had requested that everything they said be kept secret.
Particularly, she was not to mention the missing radio or the
watch found in Nancy’s shoe. Which is why she said to Mrs.
Archibald William Warren-Browne, “Anybody reads the
papers knows as much as Ido. More. Because Idon’t read
them.”
Square, squat, in the earlier forties, an Englishwoman fitted
out with an accent almost incoherently upper-class, Mrs.
Archibald William Warren-Browne did not at all resemble
the café’s other frequenters, and seemed, within that
setting, like a peacock trapped in a turkey pen. Once,
explaining to an acquaintance why she and her husband
had abandoned “family estates in the North of England,”
exchanging the hereditary home—“the jolliest, oh, the
prettiest old priory”—for an old and highly unjolly farmhouse
on the plains of western Kansas, Mrs. Warren-Browne said:
“Taxes, my dear. Death duties. Enormous, criminal death
duties. That’s what drove us out of England. Yes, we left a
year ago. Without regrets. None. We love it here. Just
adore it. Though, of course, it’s very different from our other
life. The life we’ve always known. Paris and Rome. Monte.
London. Ido—occasionally—think of London. Oh, Idon’t
really miss it—the frenzy, and never a cab, and always
worrying how one looks. Positively not. We love it here. I
suppose some people—those aware of our past, the life
we’ve led—wonder aren’t we the tiniest bit lonely, out there
in the wheat fields. Out West is where we meant to settle.
Wyoming or Nevada—la vraie chose. We hoped when we
got there some oil might stick to us. But on our way we
stopped to visit friends in Garden City—friends of friends,
actually. But they couldn’t have been kinder. Insisted we
linger on. And we thought, Well, why not? Why not hire a bit
of land and start ranching? Or farming. Which is a decision
we still haven’t come to—whether to ranch or farm. Dr.
Austin asked if we didn’t find it perhaps too quiet. Actually,
no. Actually, I’ve never known such bedlam. It’s noisier than
a bomb raid. Train whistles. Coyotes. Monsters howling the
bloody night long. A horrid racket. And since the murders it
seems to bother me more. So many things do. Our house
—what an old creaker it is! Mark you, I’m not complaining.
Really, it’s quite a serviceable house—has all the mod.
cons.—but, oh, how it coughs and grunts! And after dark,
when the wind commences, that hateful prairie wind, one
hears the most appalling moans. Imean, if one’s a bit
nervy, one can’t help imagining—silly things. Dear God!
That poor family! No, we never met them. IsawMr. Clutter
once. In the Federal Building.”
Early in December, in the course of a single afternoon, two
of the café’s steadiest customers announced plans to pack
up and leave not merely Finney County but the state. The
first was a tenant farmer who worked for Lester McCoy, a
well-known western-Kansas landowner and businessman.
He said, “Ihad myself a talk with Mr. McCoy. Tried to let
him know what’s going on out here in Holcomb and
hereabouts. How a body can’t sleep. My wife can’t sleep,
and she won’t allow me. So Itold Mr. McCoy Ilike his place
fine but he better hunt up another man. ’Count of we’re
movin’ on. Down to east Colorado. Maybe then I’ll get some
rest.”
The second announcement was made by Mrs. Hideo
Ashida, who stopped by the café with three of her four red-
cheeked children. She lined them up at the counter and told
Mrs. Hartman, “Give Bruce a box of Cracker Jack. Bobby
wants a Coke. Bonnie Jean? We know how you feel,
Bonnie Jean, but come on, have a treat.” Bonnie Jean
shook her head, and Mrs. Ashida said, “Bonnie Jean’s sort
of blue. She don’t want to leave here. The school here. And
all her friends.”
“Why, say,” said Mrs. Hartman, smiling at Bonnie Jean.
“That’s nothing to be sad over. Transferring from Holcomb
to Garden City High. Lots more boys—”
Bonnie Jean said, “You don’t understand. Daddy’s taking
us away. To Nebraska.”
Bess Hartman looked at the mother, as if expecting her to
deny the daughter’s allegation.
“It’s true, Bess,” Mrs. Ashida said.
“Idon’t know what to say,” said Mrs. Hartman, her voice
indignantly astonished, and also despairing. The Ashidas
were a part of the Holcomb community everyone
appreciated—a family likably high-spirited, yet hard-
working and neighborly and generous, though they didn’t
have much to be generous with.
Mrs. Ashida said, “We’ve been talking on it a long time.
Hideo, he thinks we can do better somewhere else.”
“When you plan to go?”
“Soon as we sell up. But anyway not before Christmas. On
account of a deal we’ve worked out with the dentist. About
Hideo’s Christmas present. Me and the kids, we’re giving
him three gold teeth. For Christmas.”
Mrs. Hartman sighed. “Idon’t know what to say. Except I
wish you wouldn’t. Just up and leave us.” She sighed again.
“Seems like we’re losing everybody. One way and another.”
“Gosh, you think Iwant to leave?” Mrs. Ashida said.“Far as
people go, this is the nicest place we ever lived. But Hideo,
he’s the man, and he says we can get a better farm in
Nebraska. And I’ll tell you something, Bess.” Mrs. Ashida
attempted a frown, but her plump, round, smooth face could
not quite manage it. “We used to argue about it. Then one
night Isaid, ‘O.K., you’re the boss, let’s go.’ After what
happened to Herb and his family, Ifelt something around
here had come to an end. Imean personally. For me. And
so Iquit arguing. Isaid O.K.” She dipped a hand into
Bruce’s box of Crackerjack. “Gosh, Ican’t get over it. Ican’t
get it off my mind. Iliked Herb. Did you know Iwas one of
the last to see him alive? Uh-huh. Me and the kids. We
been to the 4-H meeting in Garden City and he gave us a
ride home. The last thing Isaid to Herb, Itold him how I
couldn’t imagine his ever being afraid. That no matter what
the situation was, he could talk his way out of it.”
Thoughtfully she nibbled a kernel of Cracker jack, took a
swig of Bobby’s Coke, then said, “Funny, but you know,
Bess, I’ll bet he wasn’t afraid. Imean, however it happened,
I’ll bet right up to the last he didn’t believe it would. Because
it couldn’t. Not to him.”
The sun was blazing. A small boat was riding at anchor in a
mild sea: the Estrellita, with four persons aboard—Dick,
Perry, a young Mexican, and Otto, a rich middle-aged
German.
“Please. Again,” said Otto, and Perry, strumming his guitar,
sang in a husky sweet voice a Smoky Mountains song:
“In this world today while we’re living
Some folks say the worst of us they can,
But when we’re dead and in our caskets,
They always slip some lilies in our hand.
Won’t you give me flowers while I’m living . . .”
A week in Mexico City, and then he and Dick had driven
south—Cuernavaca, Taxco, Acapulco. And it was in
Acapulco, in a “jukebox honky-tonk,” that they had met the
hairy-legged and hearty Otto. Dick had “picked him up.” But
the gentleman, a vacationing Hamburg lawyer, “already had
a friend”—a young native Acapulcan who called himself the
Cowboy. “He proved to be a trustworthy person,” Perry
once said of the Cowboy. “Mean as Judas, some ways, but
oh, man, a funny boy, a real fast jockey. Dick liked him, too.
We got on great.”
The Cowboy found for the tattooed drifters a room in the
house of an uncle, undertook to improve Perry’s Spanish,
and shared the benefits of his liaison with the holidaymaker
from Hamburg, in whose company and at whose expense
they drank and ate and bought women. The host seemed to
think his pesos well spent, if only because he relished
Dick’s jokes. Each day Otto hired the Estrellita, a deep-
sea-fishing craft, and the four friends went trolling along the
coast. The Cowboy skippered the boat; Otto sketched and
fished; Perry baited hooks, daydreamed, sang, and
sometimes fished; Dick did nothing—only moaned,
complained of the motion, lay about sun-drugged and
listless, like a lizard at siesta. But Perry said, “This is finally
it. The way it ought to be.” Still, he knew that it couldn’t
continue—that it was, in fact, destined to stop that very day.
The next day Otto was returning to Germany, and Perry and
Dick were driving back to Mexico City—at Dick’s
insistence. “Sure, baby,” he’d said when they were
debating the matter. “It’s nice and all. With the sun on your
back. But the dough’s going-going-gone. And after we’ve
sold the car, what have we got left?”
The answer was that they had very little, for they had by now
mostly disposed of the stuff acquired the day of the Kansas
City check-passing spree—the camera, the cuff links, the
television sets. Also, they had sold, to a Mexico City
policeman with whom Dick had got acquainted, a pair of
binoculars and a gray Zenith portable radio. “What we’ll do
is, we’ll go back to Mex, sell the car, and maybe Ican get a
garage job. Anyway, it’s a better deal up there. Better
opportunities. Christ, Isure could use some more of that
Inez.” Inez was a prostitute who had accosted Dick on the
steps of the Palace of Fine Arts in Mexico City (the visit
was part of a sightseeing tour taken to please Perry). She
was eighteen, and Dick had promised to marry her. But he
had also promised to marry Maria, a woman of fifty, who
was the widow of a “very prominent Mexican banker.” They
had met in a bar, and the next morning she had paid him
the equivalent of seven dollars. “So how about it?” Dick
said to Perry. “We’ll sell the wagon. Find a job. Save our
dough. And see what happens.” As though Perry couldn’t
predict precisely what would happen. Suppose they got two
or three hundred for the old Chevrolet. Dick, if he knew
Dick, and he did—nowhe did—would spend it right away
on vodka and women.
While Perry sang, Otto sketched him in a sketchbook. It
was a passable likeness, and the artist perceived one not
very obvious aspect of the sitter’s countenance—its
mischief, an amused, babyish malice that suggested some
unkind cupid aiming envenomed arrows. He was naked to
the waist. (Perry was “ashamed” to take off his trousers,
“ashamed” to wear swimming trunks, for he was afraid that
the sight of his injured legs would “disgust people,” and so,
despite his underwater reveries, all the talk about skin-
diving, he hadn’t once gone into the water.) Otto
reproduced a number of the tattoos ornamenting the
subject’s overmuscled chest, arms, and small and
calloused but girlish hands. The sketchbook, which Otto
gave Perry as a parting gift, contained several drawings of
Dick—“nude studies.”
Otto shut his sketchbook, Perry put down his guitar, and the
Cowboy raised anchor, started the engine. It was time to
go. They were ten miles out, and the water was darkening.
Perry urged Dick to fish. “We may never have another
chance,” he said.
“Chance?”
“To catch a big one.”
“Jesus, I’ve got the bastard kind,” Dick said. “I’m sick.” Dick
often had headaches of migraine intensity—“the bastard
kind.” He thought they were the result of his automobile
accident. “Please, baby. Let’s be very, very quiet.”
Moments later Dick had forgotten his pain. He was on his
feet, shouting with excitement. Otto and the Cowboy were
shouting, too. Perry had hooked “a big one.” Ten feet of
soaring, plunging sailfish, it leaped, arched like a rainbow,
dived, sank deep, tugged the line taut, rose, flew, fell, rose.
An hour passed, and part of another, before the sweat-
soaked sportsman reeled it in.
There is an old man with an ancient wooden box camera
who hangs around the harbor in Acapulco, and when the
Estrellita docked, Otto commissioned him to do six
portraits of Perry posed beside his catch. Technically, the
old man’s work turned out badly—brown and streaked. Still,
they were remarkable photographs, and what made them
so was Perry’s expression, his look of unflawed fulfillment,
of beatitude, as though at last, and as in one of his dreams,
a tall yellow bird had hauled him to heaven.
One December afternoon Paul Helm was pruning the
patch of floral odds and ends that had entitled Bonnie
Clutter to membership in the Garden City Garden Club. It
was a melancholy task, for he was reminded of another
afternoon when he’d done the same chore. Kenyon had
helped him that day, and it was the last time he’d seen
Kenyon alive, or Nancy, or any of them. The weeks between
had been hard on Mr. Helm. He was “in poor health”
(poorer than he knew; he had less than four months to live),
and he was worried about a lot of things. His job, for one.
He doubted he would have it much longer. Nobody seemed
really to know, but he understood that “the girls,” Beverly
and Eveanna, intended to sell the property—though, as
he’d heard one of the boys at the café remark, “ain’t
nobody gonna buy that spread, long as the mystery lasts.” It
“didn’t do” to think about—strangers here, harvesting “our”
land. Mr. Helm minded—he minded for Herb’s sake. This
was a place, he said, that “ought to be kept in a man’s
family.” Once Herb had said to him, “Ihope there’ll always
be a Clutter here, and a Helm, too.” It was only a year ago
Herb had said that. Lord, what was he to do if the farm got
sold? He felt “too old to fit in somewhere different.”
Still, he must work, and he wanted to. He wasn’t, he said,
the kind to kick off his shoes and sit by the stove. And yet it
was true that the farm nowadays made him uneasy: the
locked house, Nancy’s horse forlornly waiting in a field, the
odor of windfall apples rotting under the apple trees, and
the absence of voices—Kenyon calling Nancy to the
telephone, Herb whistling, his glad “Good morning, Paul.”
He and Herb had “got along grand”—never a cross word
between them. Why, then, did the men from the sheriff’s
office continue to question him? Unless they thought he had
“something to hide”? Maybe he ought never to have
mentioned the Mexicans. He had informed Al Dewey that at
approximately four o’clock on Saturday, November 14, the
day of the murders, a pair of Mexicans, one mustachioed
and the other pockmarked, appeared at River Valley Farm.
Mr. Helm had seen them knock on the door of “the office,”
seen Herb step outside and talk to them on the lawn, and,
possibly ten minutes later, watched the strangers walk
away, “looking sulky.” Mr. Helm figured that they had come
asking for work and had been told there was none.
Unfortunately, though he’d been called upon to recount his
version of that day’s events many times, he had not spoken
of the incident until two weeks after the crime, because, as
he explained to Dewey, “Ijust suddenly recalled it.” But
Dewey, and some of the other investigators, seemed not to
credit his story, and behaved as though it were a tale he’d
invented to mislead them. They preferred to believe Bob
Johnson, the insurance salesman, who had spent all of
Saturday afternoon conferring with Mr. Clutter in the latter’s
office, and who was “absolutely positive” that from two to
ten past six he had been Herb’s sole visitor. Mr. Helm was
equally definite: Mexicans, a mustache, pockmarks, four
o’clock. Herb would have told them that he was speaking
the truth, convinced them that he, Paul Helm, was a man
who “said his prayers and earned his bread.” But Herb was
gone.
Gone. And Bonnie, too. Her bedroom window overlooked
the garden, and now and then, usually when she was
“having a bad spell,” Mr. Helm had seen her stand long
hours gazing into the garden, as though what she saw
bewitched her. (“When Iwas a girl,” she had once told a
friend, “Iwas terribly sure trees and flowers were the same
as birds or people. That they thought things, and talked
among themselves. And we could hear them if we really
tried. It was just a matter of emptying your head of all other
sounds. Being very quiet and listening very hard.
Sometimes Istill believe that. But one can never get quiet
enough . . .”)
Remembering Bonnie at the window, Mr. Helm looked up,
as though he expected to see her, a ghost behind the
glass. If he had, it could not have amazed him more than
what he did in fact discern—a hand holding back a curtain,
and eyes. “But,” as he subsequently described it, “the sun
was hitting that side of the house”—it made the window
glass waver, shimmeringly twisted what hung beyond it—
and by the time Mr. Helm had shielded his eyes, then
looked again, the curtains had swung closed, the window
was vacant. “My eyes aren’t too good, and Iwondered if
they had played me a trick,” he recalled. “But Iwas pretty
darn certain that they hadn’t. And Iwas pretty darn certain it
wasn’t any spook. Because Idon’t believe in spooks. So
who could it be? Sneaking around in there. Where
nobody’s got a right to go, except the law. And how did they
get in? With everything locked up like the radio was
advertising tornadoes. That’s what Iwondered. But Iwasn’t
expecting to find out—not by myself. Idropped what Iwas
doing, and cut across the fields to Holcomb. Soon as Igot
there, Iphoned Sheriff Robinson. Explained that there was
somebody prowling around inside the Clutter house. Well,
they came raring right on out. State troopers. The sheriff
and his bunch. The K.B.I. fellows. Al Dewey. Just as they
were stringing themselves around the place, sort of getting
ready for action, the front door opened.” Out walked a
person no one present had ever seen before—a man in his
middle thirties, dull-eyed, wild-haired, and wearing a hip
holster stocked with a .38-caliber pistol. “Iguess all of us
there had the identical idea—this was him, the one who
came and killed them,” Mr. Helm continued. “He didn’t
make a move. Stood quiet. Kind of blinking. They took the
gun away, and started asking questions.”
The man’s name was Adrian—Jonathan Daniel Adrian. He
was on his way to New Mexico, and at present had no fixed
address. For what purpose had he broken into the Clutter
house, and how, incidentally, had he managed it? He
showed them how. (He had lifted a lid off a water well and
crawled through a pipe tunnel that led into the basement.)
As for why, he had read about the case and was curious,
just wanted to see what the place looked like. “And then,”
according to Mr. Helm’s memory of the episode,
“somebody asked him was he a hitchhiker? Hitchhiking his
way to New Mexico? No, he said, he was driving his own
car. And it was parked down the lane a piece. So
everybody went to look at the car. When they found what
was inside it, one of the men—maybe it was Al Dewey—
said to him, told this Jonathan Daniel Adrian, ‘Well, mister,
seems like we’ve got something to discuss.’ Because,
inside the car, what they’d found was a .12-gauge shotgun.
And a hunting knife.”
Aroom in a hotel in Mexico City. In the room was an ugly
modern bureau with a lavender-tinted mirror, and tucked
into a corner of the mirror was a printed warning from the
Management:
SU DÍA TERMINA A LAS 2 P.M.
YOUR DAY ENDS AT 2 P.M.
Guests, in other words, must vacate the room by the stated
hour or expect to be charged another day’s rent—a luxury
that the present occupants were not contemplating. They
wondered only whether they could settle the sum already
owed. For everything had evolved as Perry had
prophesied: Dick had sold the car, and three days later the
money, slightly less than two hundred dollars, had largely
vanished. On the fourth day Dick had gone out hunting
honest work, and that night he had announced to Perry,
“Nuts! You know what they pay? What the wages are? For
an expert mechanic? Two bucks a day. Mexico! Honey, I’ve
had it. We got to make it out of here. Back to the States.
No, now, I’m not going to listen. Diamonds. Buried
treasure. Wake up, little boy. There ain’t no caskets of gold.
No sunken ship. And even if there was—hell, you can’t even
swim.” And the next day, having borrowed money from the
richer of his two fiancées, the banker’s widow, Dick bought
bus tickets that would take them, via San Diego, as far as
Barstow, California. “After that,” he said, “we walk.”
Of course, Perry could have struck out on his own, stayed in
Mexico, let Dick go where he damn well wanted. Why not?
Hadn’t he always been “a loner,” and without any “real
friends” (except the gray-haired, gray-eyed, and “brilliant”
Willie-Jay)? But he was afraid to leave Dick; merely to
consider it made him feel “sort of sick,” as though he were
trying to make up his mind to “jump off a train going ninety-
nine miles an hour.” The basis of his fear, or so he himself
seemed to believe, was a newly grown superstitious
certainty that “whatever had to happen won’t happen” as
long as he and Dick “stick together.” Then, too, the severity
of Dick’s “wakeup” speech, the belligerence with which
he’d proclaimed his theretofore concealed opinion of
Perry’s dreams and hopes—this, perversity being what it
is, appealed to Perry, hurt and shocked him but charmed
him, almost revived his former faith in the tough, the “totally
masculine,” the pragmatic, the decisive Dick he’d once
allowed to boss him. And so, since a sunrise hour on a
chilly Mexico City morning in early December, Perry had
been prowling about the unheated hotel room assembling
and packing his possessions—stealthily, lest he waken the
two sleeping shapes lying on one of the room’s twin beds:
Dick, and the younger of his betrotheds, Inez.
There was one belonging of his that need no longer
concern him. On their last night in Acapulco, a thief had
stolen the Gibson guitar—absconded with it from a
waterfront café where he, Otto, Dick, and the Cowboy had
been bidding one another a highly alcoholic goodbye. And
Perry was bitter about it. He felt, he later said, “real mean
and low,” explaining, “You have a guitar long enough, like I
had that one, wax and shine it, fit your voice to it, treat it like
it was a girl you really had some use for—well, it gets to be
kind of holy.” But while the purloined guitar presented no
ownership problem, his remaining property did. As he and
Dick would now be traveling by foot or thumb, they clearly
could not carry with them more than a few shirts and socks.
The rest of their clothing would have to be shipped—and,
indeed, Perry had already filled a cardboard carton (putting
into it—along with some bits of unlaundered laundry—two
pairs of boots, one pair with soles that left a Cat’s Paw
print, the other pair with diamond-pattern soles) and
addressed it to himself, care of General Delivery, Las
Vegas, Nevada.
But the big question, and source of heartache, was what to
do with his much-loved memorabilia—the two huge boxes
heavy with books and maps, yellowing letters, song lyrics,
poems, and unusual souvenirs (suspenders and a belt
fabricated from the skins of Nevada rattlers he himself had
slain; an erotic netsuke bought in Kyoto; a petrified dwarf
tree, also from Japan; the foot of an Alaskan bear).
Probably the best solution—at least, the best Perry could
devise—was to leave the stuff with “Jesus.” The “Jesus” he
had in mind tended bar in a café across the street from the
hotel, and was, Perry thought, muy simpático, definitely
someone he could trust to return the boxes on demand. (He
intended to send for them as soon as he had a “fixed
address.”)
Still, there were some things too precious to chance losing,
so while the lovers drowsed and time dawdled on toward
2:00 P.M., Perry looked through old letters, photographs,
clippings, and selected from them those mementos he
meant to take with him. Among them was a badly typed
composition entitled “A History of My Boy’s Life.” The
author of this manuscript was Perry’s father, who in an effort
to help his son obtain a parole from Kansas State
Penitentiary, had written it the previous December and
mailed it to the Kansas State Parole Board. It was a
document that Perry had read at least a hundred times,
never with indifference:
CHILDHOOD—Be glad to tell you, as Isee it, both good and
bad. Yes, Perry birth was normal. Healthy—yes. Yes, Iwas
able to care for him properly until my wife turned out to be a
disgraceful drunkard when my children were at school age.
Happy disposition—yes and no, very serious if mistreated
he never forgets. Ialso keep my promises and make him
do so. My wife was different. We lived in the country. We
are all truly outdoor people. Itaught my children the Golden
Rule. Live & let live and in many cases my children would
tell on each other when doing wrong and the guilty one
would always admit, and come forward, willing for a
spanking. And promise to be good, and always done their
work quickly and willing so they could be free to play.
Always wash themselves first thing in the morning, dress in
clean clothes, Iwas very strict about that, and wrong doings
to others, and if wrong was done to them by other kids I
made them quit playing with them. Our children were no
trouble to us as long as we were together. It all started when
my wife wanted to go to the City and live a wild life—and
ran away to do so. Ilet her go and said goodby as she took
the car and left me behind (this was during depression). My
children all cryed at the top of their voices. She only cussed
them saying they would run away to come to me later. She
got mad and then said she would turn the children to hate
me, which she did, all but Perry. For the love of my children
after several months Iwent to find them, located them in
San Francisco, my wife not knowing. Itryed to see them in
school. My wife had given orders to the teacher not to let
me see them. However, Imanaged to see them while
playing in the school yard and was surprised when they told
me, “Mama told us not to talk to you.” All but Perry. He was
different. He put his arms around me and wanted to run
away with me rite then. Itold him No. But rite after school
was out, he ran away to my lawyers office Mr. Rinso Turco.
Itook my boy back to his mother and left the City. Perry
later told me, his mother told him to find a new home. While
my children were with her they run around as they pleased, I
understand Perry got into trouble. Iwanted her to ask for
divorce, which she did after about a year or so. Her drinkin
and stepin out, living with a young man. Icontested the
divorce and was granted full custody of the children. Itook
Perry to my home to live with me. The other children were
put in homes as Icould not manage to take them all in my
home and them being part indian blood and welfare took
care of them as Irequested.
This was during depression time. Iwas working on
W.P.A. very small wages. Iowned some property and small
home at the time. Perry and Ilived together peacefully. My
heart was hurt, as Istill loved my other children also. So I
took to roaming to forget it all. Imade a livin for us both. I
sold my property and we lived in a “house car.” Perry went
to school often as possible. He didn’t like school very well.
He learns quick and never got into trouble with the other
kids. Only when the Bully Kid picked on him. He was short
and stocky a new kid in school they tried to mistreat him.
They found him willing to fight for his rights. That was the
way Iraised my kids. Ialways told them dont start a fight, if
you do, I’ll give you a beaten when Ifind out. But if the other
kids start a fight, do your best. One time a kid twice his age
at school, run up and hit him, to his surprise Perry got him
down and give him a good beating. Ihad given him some
advice in wrestling. As Ionce used to Box & Wrestle. The
lady principal of the school and all the kids watched this
fight. The lady principal loved the big kid. To see him get
whipped by my little boy Perry was more than she could
take. After that Perry was King of the Kids at school. If any
big kid tried to mistreat a small one, Perry would settle that
rite now. Even the Big Bully was afraid of Perry now, and
had to be good. But that hurt the lady principal so she came
to me complaining about Perry fighting in school. Itold her I
knew all about it and that Ididnt intend to let my boy get
beat up by kids twice his size. Ialso asked her why she let
that Bully Kid beat up on other kids. Itold her that Perry had
a rite to defend himself. Perry never started the trouble and
that Iwould take a hand in this affair myself. Itold her my
son was well liked by all the neighbors, and their kids. Ialso
told her Iwas going to take Perry out of her school real
soon, move away to another state. Which Idid. Perry is no
Angel he has done wrong many times same as so many
other kids. Rite is Rite and wrong is wrong. Idont stick up
for his wrong doings. He must pay the Hardway when he
does wrong, law is Boss he knows that by now.
YOUTH—Perry joined the merchant Marines in second
war. Iwent to Alaska, he came later and joined me there. I
trapped furs and Perry worked with the Alaska Road
Commission the first winter then he got work on the railroad
for a short while. He couldn’t get the work he liked to do.
Yes—he give me $ now and then when he had it. He also
sent me $30.00 a month while in Korea war while he was
there from beginning until the end and was dischard in
Seattle, Wash. Honorable as far as Iknow. He is
mechanically inclined. Bulldozers, draglines, shovels, heavy
duty trucks of all type is his desire. For the experience he
has had he is real good. Somewhat reckless and speed
crazy with motorcycles and light cars. But since he has had
a good taste of what speed will do, and his both legs Broke
& hip injury he now has slowed down on that I’m sure.
RECREATION—INTERESTS. Yes he had several girl friends,
soon as he found a girl to mistreat him or trifle, he would
quit her. He never was married as far as Iknow. My
troubles with his mother made him afraid of marriage
somewhat. Im a Sober man and as far as Iknow Perry is
also a person that dont like drunks. Perry is like myself a
great deal. He likes Company of decent type—outdoors
people, he like myself, likes to be by himself also he likes
best to work for himself. As Ido. I’m a jack of all trades, so
to speak, master of few and so is Perry. Ishowed him how
to make a living working for himself as a fur trapper,
prospector, carpenter, woodsman, horses, etc. Iknow how
to cook and so does he, not a professional cook just plane
cooking for himself. Bake bread, etc. hunt, and fish, trap, do
most anything else. As Isaid before, Perry likes to be his
own Boss & if he is given a chance to work at a job he
likes, tell him how you want it done, then leave him alone,
he will take great pride in doing his work. If he sees the
Boss appreciates his work he will go out of his way for him.
But dont get tuff with him. Tell him in a pleasant way how
you want to have it done. He is very touchie, his feeling is
very easily hurt, and so are mine. Ihave quit several jobs &
so has Perry on account of Bully Bosses. Perry does not
have much schooling Idont either, Ionly had second
reader. But dont let that make you think we are not sharp.
Im a self taught man & so is Perry. A White Colar job is not
for Perry or me. But outdoors jobs we can master & if we
cant, show him or me how its done & in just a couple of
days we can master a job or machine. Books are out.
Actual experience we both catch on rite now, if we like to
work at it. First of all we must like the job. But now hes a
Cripple and almost middle-aged man. Perry knows he is
not wanted now by Contracters, cripples can’t get jobs on
heavy equiptment, unless you are well know to the
Contracter. He is beginning to realize that, he is beginning
to think of a more easier way of supporting himself in line
with my life. Im sure Im correct. Ialso think speed is no
longer his desire. Inotice all that now in his letters to me.
He says “be careful Dad. Don’t drive if you feel sleepy,
better stop & rest by the road side.” These are the same
words Iused to tell him. Now he’s telling me. He’s learned a
lesson.
As Isee it—Perry has learned a lesson he will never
forget. Freedom means everything to him you will never get
him behind bars again. Im quite sure Im rite. Inotice a big
change in the way he talks. He deeply regrets his mistake
he told me. Ialso know he feels ashamed to meet people
he knows he will not tell them he was behind bars. He
asked me not to mention where he is to his friends. When
he wrote & told me he was behind bars, Itold him let that be
a lesson—that Iwas glad that it happened that way when it
could have been worse. Someone could have shot him. I
also told him to take his term behind bars with a smile U
done it yourself. U know better. Ididn’t raise you to steal
from others, so dont complain to me how tuff it is in prison.
Be a good boy in prison. & he promised that he would. I
hope he is a good prisoner. Im sure no one will talk him into
stealing anymore. The lawis boss, he knows that. He loves
his Freedom.
How well Iknow that Perry is goodhearted if you treat him
rite. Treat him mean & you got a buzz saw to fight. You can
trust him with any amount of $ if your his friend. He will do
as you say he wont steal a cent from a friend or anyone
else. Before this happened. And Isincerely hope he will live
the rest of his life a honest man. He did steal something in
Company with others when he was a little kid. just ask Perry
if Iwas a good father to him ask him if his mother was good
to him in Frisco. Perry knows whats good for him. U got him
whipped forever. He knows when he’s beat. He’s not a
dunce. He knows life is too short to sweet to spend behind
bars ever again.
RELATIVES. One sister Bobo married, and me his father is
all that is living of Perry. Bobo & her husband are self-
supporting. Own their own home & I’m able & active to take
care of myself also. Isold my lodge in Alaska two years
ago. Iintend to have another small place of my own next
year. Ilocated several mineral claims & hope to get
something out of them. Besides that Ihave not given up
prospecting. Iam also asked to write a book on artistic
wood carving, and the famous Trappers Den Lodge Ibuild
in Alaska once my homestead known by all tourists that
travel by car to Anchorage and maybe Iwill. I’ll share all I
have with Perry. Anytime Ieat he eats. As long as Im alive.
& when Idie Ive got life insurance that will be paid to him so
he can start LIFE Anewwhen he gets free again. In case Im
not alive then.
This biography always set racing a stable of emotions—
self-pity in the lead, love and hate running evenly at first, the
latter ultimately pulling ahead. And most of the memories it
released were unwanted, though not all. In fact, the first part
of his life that Perry could remember was treasurable—a
fragment composed of applause, glamour. He was
perhaps three, and he was seated with his sisters and his
older brother in the grandstand at an open-air rodeo; in the
ring, a lean Cherokee girl rode a wild horse, a “bucking
bronc,” and her loosened hair whipped back and forth, flew
about like a flamenco dancer’s. Her name was Flo
Buckskin, and she was a professional rodeo performer, a
“champion bronc-rider.” So was her husband, Tex John
Smith; it was while touring the Western rodeo circuit that
the handsome Indian girl and the homely-handsome Irish
cowboy had met, married, and had the four children sitting
in the grandstand. (And Perry could remember many
another rodeo spectacle—see again his father skipping
about inside a circle of spinning lassos, or his mother, with
silver and turquoise bangles jangling on her wrists, trick-
riding at a desperado speed that thrilled her youngest child
and caused crowds in towns from Texas to Oregon to
“stand up and clap.”)
Until Perry was five, the team of “Tex & Flo” continued to
work the rodeo circuit. As a way of life, it wasn’t “any gallon
of ice cream,” Perry once recalled: “Six of us riding in an
old truck, sleeping in it, too, sometimes, living off mush and
Hershey kisses and condensed milk. Hawks Brand
condensed milk it was called, which is what weakened my
kidneys—the sugar content—which is why Iwas always
wetting the bed.” Yet it was not an unhappy existence,
especially for a little boy proud of his parents, admiring of
their showmanship and courage—a happier life, certainly,
than what replaced it. For Tex and Flo, both forced by
ailments to retire from their occupation, settled near Reno,
Nevada. They fought, and Flo “took to whiskey,” and then,
when Perry was six, she departed for San Francisco,
taking the children with her. It was exactly as the old man
had written: “Ilet her go and said goodby as she took the
car and left me behind (this was during depression). My
children all cryed at the top of their voices. She only cursed
them saying they would run away to come to me later.” And,
indeed, over the course of the next three years Perry had
on several occasions run off, set out to find his lost father,
for he had lost his mother as well, learned to “despise” her;
liquor had blurred the face, swollen the figure of the once
sinewy, limber Cherokee girl, had “soured her soul,” honed
her tongue to the wickedest point, so dissolved her self-
respect that generally she did not bother to ask the names
of the stevedores and trolley-car conductors and such
persons who accepted what she offered without charge
(except that she insisted they drink with her first, and dance
to the tunes of a wind-up Victrola).
Consequently, as Perry recalled, “Iwas always thinking
about Dad, hoping he could come take me away, and I
remember, like a second ago, the time Isaw him again.
Standing in the schoolyard. It was like when the ball hits the
bat really solid. Di Maggio. Only Dad wouldn’t help me.
Told me to be good and hugged me and went away. It was
not long afterward my mother put me to stay in a Catholic
orphanage. The one where the Black Widows were always
at me. Hitting me. Because of wetting the bed. Which is
one reason Ihave an aversion to nuns. And God. And
religion. But later on Ifound there are people even more
evil. Because, after a couple of months, they tossed me out
of the orphanage, and she [his mother] put me some place
worse. A children’s shelter operated by the Salvation Army.
They hated me, too. For wetting the bed. And being half-
Indian. There was this one nurse, she used to call me
‘nigger’ and say there wasn’t any difference between
niggers and Indians. Oh, Jesus, was she an Evil Bastard!
Incarnate. What she used to do, she’d fill a tub with ice-cold
water, put me in it, and hold me under till Iwas blue. Nearly
drowned. But she got found out, the bitch. Because Icaught
pneumonia. Ialmost conked. Iwas in the hospital two
months. It was while Iwas so sick that Dad came back.
When Igot well, he took me away.”
For almost a year father and son lived together in the house
near Reno, and Perry went to school. “Ifinished the third
grade,” Perry recalled. “Which was the finish. Inever went
back. Because that summer Dad built a primitive sort of
trailer, what he called a ‘house car.’ It had two bunks and a
little cooking galley. The stove was good. You could cook
anything on it. Baked our own bread. Iused to put up
preserves—pickled apples, crabapple jelly. Anyway, for the
next six years we shifted around the country. Never stayed
nowhere too long. When we stayed some place too long,
people would begin to look at Dad, act like he was a
character, and Ihated that, it hurt me. Because Iloved Dad
then. Even though he could be rough on me. Bossy as hell.
But Iloved Dad then. So Iwas always glad when we moved
on.” Moved on—to Wyoming, Idaho, Oregon, eventually
Alaska. In Alaska, Tex taught his son to dream of gold, to
hunt for it in the sandy beds of snow-water streams, and
there, too, Perry learned to use a gun, skin a bear, track
wolves and deer.
“Christ, it was cold,” Perry remembered. “Dad and Islept
hugged together, rolled up in blankets and bearskins.
Mornings, before daylight, I’d hustle our breakfast, biscuits
and syrup, fried meat, and off we went to scratch a living. It
would have been O.K. if only Ihadn’t grown up; the older I
got, the less Iwas able to appreciate Dad. He knew
everything, one way, but he didn’t know anything, another
way. Whole sections of me Dad was ignorant of. Didn’t
understand an iota of. Like Icould play a harmonica first
time Ipicked one up. Guitar, too. Ihad this great natural
musical ability. Which Dad didn’t recognize. Or care about.
Iliked to read, too. Improve my vocabulary. Make up songs.
And Icould draw. But Inever got any encouragement—from
him or anybody else. Nights Iused to lie awake—trying to
control my bladder, partly, and partly because Icouldn’t
stop thinking. Always, when it was too cold hardly to
breathe, I’d think about Hawaii. About a movie I’d seen.
With Dorothy Lamour. Iwanted to go there. Where the sun
was. And all you wore was grass and flowers.”
Wearing considerably more, Perry, one balmy evening in
wartime 1945, found himself inside a Honolulu tattoo parlor
having a snake-and-dagger design applied to his left
forearm. He had got there by the following route: a row with
his father, a hitchhike journey from Anchorage to Seattle, a
visit to the recruiting offices of the Merchant Marine. “But I
never would have joined if I’d known what Iwas going up
against,” Perry once said. “Inever minded the work, and I
liked being a sailor—seaports, and all that. But the queens
on ship wouldn’t leave me alone. A sixteen-year-old kid,
and a small kid. Icould handle myself, sure. But a lot of
queens aren’t effeminate, you know. Hell, I’ve known
queens could toss a pool table out the window. And the
piano after it. Those kind of girls, they can give you an evil
time, especially when there’s a couple of them, they get
together and gang up on you, and you’re just a kid. It can
make you practically want to kill yourself. Years later, when I
went into the Army—when Iwas stationed in Korea—the
same problem came up. Ihad a good record in the Army,
good as anybody; they gave me the Bronze Star. But I
never got promoted. After four years, and fighting through
the whole goddam Korean war, Iought at least to have
made corporal. But Inever did. Know why? Because the
sergeant we had was tough. Because Iwouldn’t roll over.
Jesus, Ihate that stuff. Ican’t stand it. Though—Idon’t
know. Some queers I’ve really liked. As long as they didn’t
try anything. The most worthwhile friend Iever had, really
sensitive and intelligent, he turned out to be queer.”
In the interval between quitting the Merchant Marine and
entering the Army, Perry had made peace with his father,
who, when his son left him, drifted down to Nevada, then
back to Alaska. In 1952, the year Perry completed his
military service, the old man was in the midst of plans
meant to end his travels forever. “Dad was in a fever,” Perry
recalled. “Wrote me he had bought some land on the
highway outside Anchorage. Said he was going to have a
hunting lodge, a place for tourists. ‘Trapper’s Den Lodge’—
that was to be the name. And asked me to hurry on up there
and help him build it. He was sure we’d make a fortune.
Well, while Iwas still in the Army, stationed at Fort Lewis,
Washington, I’d bought a motorcycle (murdercycles, they
ought to call them), and as soon as Igot discharged I
headed for Alaska. Got as far as Bellingham. Up there on
the border. It was raining. My bike went into a skid.”
The skid delayed for a year the reunion with his father.
Surgery and hospitalization account for six months of that
year; the remainder he spent recuperating in the forest
home, near Bellingham, of a young Indian logger and
fisherman. “Joe James. He and his wife befriended me.
The difference in our age was only two or three years, but
they took me into their home and treated me like Iwas one
of their kids. Which was O.K. Because they took trouble
with their kids and liked them. At the time they had four; the
number finally went to seven. They were very good to me,
Joe and his family. Iwas on crutches, Iwas pretty helpless.
Just had to sit around. So to give me something to do, try to
make myself useful, Istarted what became a sort of school.
The pupils were Joe’s kids, along with some of their
friends, and we held classes in the parlor. Iwas teaching
harmonica and guitar. Drawing. And penmanship.
Everybody always remarks what a beautiful handwriting I
have. Ido, and it’s because once Ibought a book on the
subject and practiced till Icould write same as in the book.
Also, we used to read stories—the kids did, each one in
turn, and I’d correct them as we went along. It was fun. Ilike
kids. Little kids. And that was a nice time. But then the
spring came. It hurt me to walk, but Icould walk. And Dad
was still waiting for me.”
Waiting, but not idly. By the time Perry arrived at the site of
the proposed hunting lodge, his father, working alone, had
finished the hardest chores—had cleared the ground,
logged the necessary timber, cracked and carted
wagonloads of native rock. “But he didn’t commence to
build till Igot there. We did every damn piece of it
ourselves. With once in a while an Indian helper. Dad was
like a maniac. It didn’t matter what was happening—
snowstorms, rainstorms, winds that could split a tree—we
kept right at it. The day the roof was finished, Dad danced
all over it, shouting and laughing, doing a regular jig. Well, it
turned out quite an exceptional place. That could sleep
twenty people. Had a big fireplace in the dining room. And
there was a cocktail lounge. The Totem Pole Cocktail
Lounge. Where Iwas to entertain the customers. Singing
and so forth. We opened for business end of 1953.”
But the expected huntsmen did not materialize, and though
ordinary tourists—the few that trickled along the highway—
now and again paused to photograph the beyond-belief
rusticity of Trapper’s Den Lodge, they seldom stopped
overnight. “For a while we fooled ourselves. Kept thinking it
would catch on. Dad tried to trick up the place. Made a
Garden of Memories. With a Wishing Well. Put painted
signs up and down the highway. But none of it meant a
nickel more. When Dad realized that—saw it wasn’t any
use, all we’d done was waste ourselves and all our money
—he began to take it out on me. Boss me around. Be
spiteful. Say Ididn’t do my proper share of the work. It
wasn’t his fault, any more than it was mine. A situation like
that, with no money and the grub getting low, we couldn’t
help but be on each other’s nerves. The point came we
were downright hungry. Which is what we fell out over.
Ostensibly. A biscuit. Dad snatched a biscuit out of my
hand, and said Iate too much, what a greedy, selfish
bastard Iwas, and why didn’t Iget out, he didn’t want me
there no more. He carried on like that till Icouldn’t stand it.
My hands got hold of his throat. My hands—but Icouldn’t
control them. They wanted to choke him to death. Dad,
though, he’s slippery, a smart wrestler. He tore loose and
ran to get his gun. Came back pointing it at me. He said,
‘Look at me, Perry. I’m the last thing living you’re ever
gonna see.’ Ijust stood my ground. But then he realized the
gun wasn’t even loaded, and he started to cry. Sat down
and bawled like a kid. Then Iguess Iwasn’t mad at him any
more. Iwas sorry for him. For both of us. But it wasn’t a bit
of use—there wasn’t anything Icould say. Iwent out for a
walk. This was April, but the woods were still deep in snow.
Iwalked till it was almost night. When Igot back, the lodge
was dark, and all the doors were locked. And everything I
owned was lying out there in the snow. Where Dad had
thrown it. Books. Clothes. Everything. Ijust let it lie. Except
my guitar. Ipicked up my guitar and started on down the
highway. Not a dollar in my pocket. Around midnight a truck
stopped to give me a lift. The driver asked where Iwas
going. Itold him, ‘Wherever you’re headed, that’s where I’m
going.”
Several weeks later, after again sheltering with the James
family, Perry decided on a definite destination—Worcester,
Massachusetts, the home town of an “Army buddy” he
thought might welcome him and help him find “a good-
paying job.” Various detours prolonged the eastward
journey; he washed dishes in an Omaha restaurant,
pumped gas at an Oklahoma garage, worked a month on a
ranch in Texas. By July of 1955 he had reached, on the trek
to Worcester, a small Kansas town, Phillipsburg, and there
“fate,” in the form of “bad company,” asserted itself. “His
name was Smith,” Perry said. “Same as me. Idon’t even
recall his first name. He was just somebody I’d picked up
with somewhere, and he had a car, and he said he’d give
me a ride as far as Chicago. Anyway, driving through
Kansas we came to this little Phillipsburg place and
stopped to look at a map. Seems to me like it was a
Sunday. Stores shut. Streets quiet. My friend there, bless
his heart, he looked around and made a suggestion.” The
suggestion was that they burglarize a nearby building, the
Chandler Sales Company. Perry agreed, and they broke
into the deserted premises and removed a quantity of
office equipment (typewriters, adding machines). That
might have been that if only, some days afterward, the
thieves hadn’t ignored a traffic signal in the city of Saint
Joseph, Missouri. “The junk was still in the car. The cop that
stopped us wanted to know where we got it. A little
checking was done, and, as they say, we were ‘returned’ to
Phillipsburg, Kansas. Where the folks have a real cute jail. If
you like jails.” Within forty-eight hours Perry and his
companion had discovered an open window, climbed out
of it, stolen a car, and driven northwest to McCook,
Nebraska. “Pretty soon we broke up, me and Mr. Smith. I
don’t know what ever became of him. We both made the
F.B.I.’s Wanted list. But far as Iknow, they never caught up
with him.”
One wet afternoon the following November, a Greyhound
bus deposited Perry in Worcester, a Massachusetts factory
town of steep, up-and-down streets that even in the best of
weathers seem cheerless and hostile. “Ifound the house
where my friend was supposed to live. My Army friend from
Korea. But the people there said he’d left six months back
and they had no idea where he’d gone. Too bad, big
disappointment, end of the world, all that. So Ifound a liquor
store and bought a half gallon of red wop and went back to
the bus depot and sat there drinking my wine and getting a
little warmer. Iwas really enjoying myself till a man came
along and arrested me for vagrancy.” The police booked
him as “Bob Turner”—a name he’d adopted because of
being listed by the F.B.I. He spent fourteen days in jail, was
fined ten dollars, and departed from Worcester on another
wet November afternoon. “Iwent down to New York and
took a room in a hotel on Eighth Avenue,” Perry said. “Near
Forty-second Street. Finally, Igot a night job. Doing odd
jobs around a penny arcade. Right there on Forty-second
Street, next to an Automat. Which is where Iate—when I
ate. In over three months Ipractically never left the
Broadway area. For one thing, Ididn’t have the right
clothes. Just Western clothes—jeans and boots. But there
on Forty-second Street nobody cares, it all rides
—anything. My whole life, Inever met so many freaks.”
He lived out the winter in that ugly, neon-lit neighborhood,
with its air full of the scent of popcorn, simmering hot dogs,
and orange drink. But then, one bright March morning on
the edge of spring, as he remembered it, “two F.B.I.
bastards woke me up. Arrested me at the hotel. Bang!—I
was extradited back to Kansas. To Phillipsburg. That same
cute jail. They nailed me to the cross—larceny, jailbreak,
car theft. Igot five to ten years. In Lansing. After I’d been
there awhile, Iwrote Dad. Let him know the news. And
wrote Barbara, my sister. By now, over the years, that was
all Ihad left me. Jimmy a suicide. Fern out the window. My
mother dead. Been dead eight years. Everybody gone but
Dad and Barbara.”
A letter from Barbara was among the sheaf of selected
matter that Perry preferred not to leave behind in the
Mexico City hotel room. The letter, written in a pleasingly
legible script, was dated April 28, 1958, at which time the
recipient had been imprisoned for approximately two years:
Dearest Bro. Perry,
We got your 2nd letter today & forgive me for not writing
sooner. Our weather here, as yours is, is turning warmer &
maybe Iam getting spring fever but Iam going to try and do
better. Your first letter was very disturbing, as I’m sure you
must have suspected but that was not the reason Ihaven’t
written—it’s true the children do keep me busy & it’s hard to
find time to sit and concentrate on a letter as Ihave wanted
to write you for some time. Donnie has learned to open the
doors and climb on the chairs & other furniture & he worries
me constantly about falling.
Ihave been able to let the children play in the yard now &
then—but Ialways have to go out with them as they can hurt
themselves if Idon’t pay attention. But nothing is forever & I
know Iwill be sorry when they start running the block & I
don’t know where they’re at. Here are some statistics if
you’re interested—
Height Weight Shoe Size
Freddie 36-1/2” 26-1/2 lbs. 7-1/2 narrow
Baby 37-1/2 29-1/2 lbs. 8 narrow
Donnie 34 26 lbs 6-1/2 wide
You can see that Donnie is a pretty big boy for 15 months
& with his 16 teeth and his sparkling personality—people
just can’t help loving him. He wears the same size clothes
as Baby and Freddie but the pants are too long as yet.
Iam going to try & make this letter a long one so it will
probably have a lot of interruptions such as right now it’s
time for Donnie’s bath—Baby & Freddie had theirs this A.M.
as it’s quite cold today & Ihave had them inside. Be back
soon—
About my typing—First—Icannot tell a lie! Iam not a
typist. Iuse from 1 to 5 fingers & although Ican manage &
do help Big Fred with his business affairs, what it takes me
1 hr. to do would probably take someone with the Know
How—15 minutes—Seriously, Ido not have the time nor the
will to learn professionally. But Ithink it is wonderful how you
have stuck with it and become such an excellent typist. Ido
believe we all were very adaptable (Jimmy, Fern, you and
myself) & we had all been blessed with a basic flair for the
artistic—among other things. Even Mother & Dad were
artistic.
Itruthfully feel none of us have anyone to blame for
whatever we have done with our own personal lives. It has
been proven that at the age of 7 most of us have reached
the age of reason—which means we do, at this age,
understand & knowthe difference between right & wrong.
Of course—environment plays an awfully important part in
our lives such as the Convent in mine & in my case Iam
grateful for that influence. In Jimmy’s case—he was the
strongest of us all. Iremember how he worked & went to
school when there was no one to tell him & it was his own
WILL to make something of himself. We will never know the
reasons for what eventually happened, why he did what he
did, but Istill hurt thinking of it. It was such a waste. But we
have very little control over our human weaknesses, & this
applies also to Fern & the hundreds of thousands of other
people including ourselves—for we all have weaknesses. In
your case—Idon’t know what your weakness is but Ido feel
—IT IS NO SHAME TO HAVE A DIRTYFACE—THE
SHAME COMES WHEN YOU KEEP IT DIRTY.
In all truthfulness & with love for you Perry, for you are my
only living brother and the uncle of my children, Icannot say
or feel your attitude towards our father or your imprisonment
JUST or healthy. If you are getting your back up—better
simmer down as Irealize there are none of us who take
criticism cheerfully & it is natural to feel a certain amount of
resentment towards the one giving this criticism so Iam
prepared for one or two things—a) Not to hear from you at
all, or b) a letter telling me exactly what you think of me.
Ihope I’m wrong & Isincerely hope you will give this letter
a lot of thought & try to see—how someone else feels.
Please understand Iknow Iam not an authority & Ido not
boast great intelligence or education but Ido believe Iam a
normal individual with basic reasoning powers & the will to
live my life according to the laws of God & Man. It is also
true that Ihave “fallen” at times, as is normal—for as Isaid I
am human & therefore Itoo have human weaknesses but
the point is, again, There is no shame—having a dirty face
—the shame comes when you keep it dirty. No one is more
aware of my shortcomings and mistakes than myself so I
won’t bore you further.
Now, first, & most important—Dad is not responsible for
your wrong doings or your good deeds. What you have
done, whether right or wrong, is your own doing. From what
Ipersonally know, you have lived your life exactly as you
pleased without regard to circumstances or persons who
loved you—who might be hurt. Whether you realize it or not
—your present confinement is embarrassing to me as well
as Dad—not because of what you did but the fact that you
don’t show me any signs of SINCERE regret and seem to
show no respect for any laws, people or anything. Your
letter implies that the blame of all your problems is that of
someone else, but never you. Ido admit that you are
intelligent & your vocabulary is excellent & Ido feel you can
do anything you decide to do & do it well but what exactly
do you want to do & are you willing to work & make an
honest effort to attain whatever it is you choose to do?
Nothing good comes easy & I’m sure you’ve heard this
many times but once more won’t hurt.
In case you want the truth about Dad—his heart is broken
because of you. He would give anything to get you out so
he can have his son back—but Iam afraid you would only
hurt him worse if you could. He is not well and is getting
older &, as the saying goes, he cannot “Cut the Mustard” as
in the old days. He has been wrong at times & he realizes
this but whatever he had and wherever he went he shared
his life & belongings with you when he wouldn’t do this for
anyone else. Now Idon’t say you owe him undying
gratitude or your life but you do owe him RESPECT and
COMMON DECENCY. I, personally, am proud of Dad. I
love him & Respect him as my Dad & Iam only sorry he
chose to be the Lone Wolf with his son, or he might be
living with us and share our love instead of alone in his little
trailer & longing & waiting & lonesome for you, his son. I
worry for him & when Isay I Imean my husband too for my
husband respects our Dad. Because he is a MAN. It’s true
that Dad did not have a great extensive education but in
school we only learn to recognize the words and to spell but
the application of these words to real life is another thing
that only LIFE & LIVING can give us. Dad has lived & you
show ignorance in calling him uneducated & unable to
understand “the scientific meaning etc” of life’s problems. A
mother is still the only one who can kiss a boo-boo and
make it all well—explain that scientifically.
I’m sorry to let you have it so strong but Ifeel Imust speak
my piece. Iam sorry that this must be censored [by the
prison authorities], & Isincerely hope this letter is not
detrimental towards your eventual release but Ifeel you
should know & realize what terrible hurt you have done.
Dad is the important one as Iam dedicated to my family but
you are the only one Dad loves—in short, his “family.” He
knows Ilove him, of course, but the closeness is not there,
as you know.
Your confinement is nothing to be proud of and you will
have to live with it & try & live it down & it can be done but
not with your attitude of feeling everyone is stupid &
uneducated & un-understanding. You are a human being
with a free will. Which puts you above the animal level. But if
you live your life without feeling and compassion for your
fellow-man—you are as an animal—“an eye for an eye, a
tooth for a tooth” & happiness & peace of mind is not
attained by living thus.
As far as responsibility goes, no one really wants it—but
all of us are responsible to the community we live in & its
laws. When the time comes to assume the responsibility of
a home and children or business, this is the seeding of the
boys from the Men—for surely you can realize what a mess
the world would be if everyone in it said, “Iwant to be an
individual, without responsibilities, & be able to speak my
mind freely & do as Ialone will.” We are all free to speak &
do as we individually will—providing this “freedom” of
Speech & Deed are not injurious to our fellow-man.
Think about it, Perry. You are above average in
intelligence, but somehow your reasoning is off the beam.
Maybe it’s the strain of your confinement. Whatever it is—
remember—you & only you are responsible and it is up to
you and you alone to overcome this part of your life. Hoping
to hear from you soon.
With Love & Prayers,
Your sister & Bro. in Law
Barbara & Frederic & Family
In preserving this letter, and including it in his collection of
particular treasures, Perry was not moved by affection. Far
from it. He “loathed” Barbara, and just the other day he had
told Dick, “The only real regret Ihave Iwish the hell my
sister had been in that house.” (Dick had laughed, and
confessed to a similar yearning: “Ikeep thinking what fun if
my second wife had been there. Her, and all her goddam
family.”) No, he valued the letter merely because his prison
friend, the “super-intelligent” Willie-Jay, had written for him
a “very sensitive” analysis of it, occupying two single-
spaced typewritten pages, with the title “Impressions I
Garnered from the Letter” at the top:
IMPRESSIONS IGARNEREDFROM THE LETTER
1.) When she began this letter, she intended that it should
be a compassionate demonstration of Christian principles.
That is to say that in return for your letter to her, which
apparently annoyed her, she meant to turn the other cheek
hoping in this way to incite regret for your previous letter
and to place you on the defensive in your next.
However few people can successfully demonstrate a
principle in common ethics when their deliberation is
festered with emotionalism. Your sister substantiates this
failing for as her letter progresses her judgment gives way
to temper—her thoughts are good, lucid the products of
intelligence, but it is not now an unbiased, impersonal
intelligence. It is a mind propelled by emotional response to
memory and frustration; consequently, however wise her
admonishments might be, they fail to inspire resolve, unless
it would be the resolve to retaliate by hurting her in your next
letter. Thus commencing a cycle that can only culminate in
further anger and distress.
2.) It is a foolish letter, but born of human failing.
Your letter to her, and this, her answer to you, failed in
their objectives. Your letter was an attempt to explain your
outlook on life, as you are necessarily affected by it. It was
destined to be misunderstood, or taken too literally
because your ideas are opposed to conventionalism. What
could be more conventional than a housewife with three
children, who is “dedicated” to her family???? What could
be more natural than that she would resent an
unconventional person. There is considerable hypocrisy in
conventionalism. Any thinking person is aware of this
paradox; but in dealing with conventional people it is
advantageous to treat them as though they were not
hypocrites. It isn’t a question of faithfulness to your own
concepts; it is a matter of compromise so that you can
remain an individual without the constant threat of
conventional pressures. Her letter failed because she
couldn’t conceive of the profundity of your problem—she
couldn’t fathom the pressures brought to bear upon you
because of environment, intellectual frustration and a
growing tendency toward isolationism.
3.) She feels that:
a) You are leaning too heavily towards self-pity.
b) That you are too calculating.
c) That you are really undeserving of an 8 page letter
written in between motherly duties.
4.) On page 3 she writes: “Itruthfully feel none of us has
anyone to blame etc.” Thus vindicating those who bore
influence in her formative years. But is this the whole truth?
She is a wife and mother. Respectable and more or less
secure. It is easy to ignore the rain if you have a raincoat.
But how would she feel if she were compelled to hustle her
living on the streets? Would she still be all-forgiving about
the people in her past? Absolutely not. Nothing is more
usual than to feel that others have shared in our failures, just
as it is an ordinary reaction to forget those who have
shared in our achievements.
5.) Your sister respects your Dad. She also resents the
fact that you have been preferred. Her jealousy takes a
subtle form in this letter. Between the lines she is
registering a question: “Ilove Dad and have tried to live so
he could be proud to own me as his daughter. But Ihave
had to content myself with the crumbs of his affection.
Because it is you he loves, and why should it be so?”
Obviously over the years your Dad has taken advantage
of your sister’s emotional nature via the mails. Painting a
picture that justifies her opinion of him—an underdog
cursed with an ungrateful son upon whom he has showered
love and concern, only to be infamously treated by that son
in return.
On page 7 she says she is sorry that her letter must be
censored. But she is really not sorry at all. She is glad it
passes through a censor. Subconsciously she has written it
with the censor in mind, hoping to convey the idea that the
Smith family is really a well-ordered unit: “Please do not
judge us all by Perry.”
About the mother kissing away her child’s boo-boo. This
is a woman’s form of sarcasm.
6.) You write to her because:
a) You love her after a fashion.
b) You feel a need for this contact with the outside
world.
c) You can use her.
Prognosis: Correspondence between you and your sister
cannot serve anything but a purely social function. Keep the
theme of your letters within the scope of her understanding.
Do not unburden your private conclusions. Do not put her
on the defensive and do not permit her to put you on the
defensive. Respect her limitations to comprehend your
objectives, and remember that she is touchy towards
criticism of your Dad. Be consistent in your attitude towards
her and do not add anything to the impression she has that
you are weak, not because you need her goodwill but
because you can expect more letters like this, and they can
only serve to increase your already dangerous anti-social
instincts.
FINISH
As Perry continued to sort and choose, the pile of material
he thought too dear to part with, even temporarily, assumed
a tottering height. But what was he to do? He couldn’t risk
losing the Bronze Medal earned in Korea, or his high-
school diploma (issued by the Leavenworth County Board
of Education as a result of his having, while in prison,
resumed his long-recessed studies). Nor did he care to
chance the loss of a manila envelope fat with photographs
—primarily of himself, and ranging in time from a pretty-
little-boy portrait made when he was in the Merchant Marine
(and on the back of which he had scribbled, “16 yrs. old.
Young, happy-go-lucky & Innocent”) to the recent Acapulco
pictures. And there were half a hundred other items he had
decided he must take with him, among them his treasure
maps, Otto’s sketchbook, and two thick notebooks, the
thicker of which constituted his personal dictionary, a non-
alphabetically listed miscellany of words he believed
“beautiful” or “useful,” or at least “worth memorizing.”
(Sample page: “Thanatoid = deathlike; Omnilingual =
versed in languages; Amerce = punishment, amount fixed
by court; Nescient = ignorance; Facinorous = atrociously
wicked; Hagiophobia = a morbid fear of holy places &
things; Lapidicolous = living under stones, as certain blind
beetles; Dyspathy = lack of sympathy, fellow feeling;
Psilopher = a fellow who fain would pass as a philosopher;
Omophagia = eating raw flesh, the rite of some savage
tribes; Depredate = to pillage, rob, and prey upon;
Aphrodisiac = a drug or the like which excites sexual
desire; Megalodactylous = having abnormally large fingers;
Myrtophobia = fear of night and darkness.”)
On the cover of the second notebook, the handwriting of
which he was so proud, a script abounding in curly,
feminine flourishes, proclaimed the contents to be “The
Private Diary of Perry Edward Smith”—an inaccurate
description, for it was not in the least a diary but, rather, a
form of anthology consisting of obscure facts (“Every fifteen
years Mars gets closer. 1958 is a close year”), poems and
literary quotations (“No man is an island, Entire of itself”),
and passages for newspapers and books paraphrased or
quoted. For example:
My acquaintances are many, my friends are few; those
who really know me fewer still.
Heard about a new rat poison on the market. Extremely
potent, odorless, tasteless, is so completely absorbed
once swallowed that no trace could ever be found in a dead
body.
If called upon to make a speech: “Ican’t remember what I
was going to say for the life of me—Idon’t think that ever
before in my life have so many people been so directly
responsible for my being so very, very glad. It’s a wonderful
moment and a rare one and I’m certainly indebted. Thank
you!”
Read interesting article Feb. issue of Man to Man: “I
Knifed My Way to a Diamond Pit.”
“It is almost impossible for a man who enjoys freedom
with all its prerogatives, to realize what it means to be
deprived of that freedom.”—Said by Erle Stanley Gardner.
“What is life? It is the flash of a firefly in the night. It is a
breath of a buffalo in the wintertime. It is as the little shadow
that runs across the grass and loses itself in the sunset.”—
Said by Chief Crowfoot, Blackfoot Indian Chief.
This last entry was written in red ink and decorated with a
border of green-ink stars; the anthologist wished to
emphasize its “personal significance.” “A breath of a
buffalo in the wintertime”—that exactly evoked his view of
life. Why worry? What was there to “sweat about”? Man
was nothing, a mist, a shadow absorbed by shadows.
But, damn it, you do worry, scheme, fret over your
fingernails and the warnings of hotel managements: “SU DÍA
TERMINA A LAS 2 P.M.”
“Dick? You hear me?” Perry said. “It’s almost one o’clock.”
Dick was awake. He was rather more than that; he and Inez
were making love. As though reciting a rosary, Dick
incessantly whispered: “Is it good, baby? Is it good?” But
Inez, smoking a cigarette, remained silent. The previous
midnight, when Dick had brought her to the room and told
Perry that she was going to sleep there, Perry, though
disapproving, had acquiesced, but if they imagined that
their conduct stimulated him, or seemed to him anything
other than a “nuisance,” they were wrong. Nevertheless,
Perry felt sorry for Inez. She was such a “stupid kid”—she
really believed that Dick meant to marry her, and had no
idea he was planning to leave Mexico that very afternoon.
“Is it good, baby? Is it good?”
Perry said: “For Christsake, Dick. Hurry it up, will you? Our
day ends at two P.M.”
It was Saturday, Christmas was near, and the traffic crept
along Main Street. Dewey, caught in the traffic, looked up at
the holly garlands that hung above the street—swags of
gala greenery trimmed with scarlet paper bells—and was
reminded that he had not yet bought a single gift for his wife
or his sons. His mind automatically rejected problems not
concerned with the Clutter case. Marie and many of their
friends had begun to wonder at the completeness of his
fixation.
One close friend, the young lawyer Clifford R. Hope, Jr.,
had spoken plainly: “Do you know what’s happening to you,
Al? Do you realize you never talk about anything else?”
“Well,” Dewey had replied, “that’s all Ithink about. And
there’s the chance that just while talking the thing over, I’ll hit
on something Ihaven’t thought of before. Some new angle.
Or maybe you will. Damn it, Cliff, what do you suppose my
life will be if this thing stays in the Open File? Years from
now I’ll still be running down tips, and every time there’s a
murder, a case anywhere in the country even remotely
similar, I’ll have to horn right in, check, see if there could be
any possible connection. But it isn’t only that. The real thing
is I’ve come to feel Iknow Herb and the family better than
they ever knew themselves. I’m haunted by them. Iguess I
always will be. Until Iknow what happened.”
Dewey’s dedication to the puzzle had resulted in an
uncharacteristic absent-mindedness. Only that morning
Marie had asked him please, would he please, please, not
forget to. . . But he couldn’t remember, or didn’t, until free of
the shopping-day traffic and racing along Route 50 toward
Holcomb, he passed Dr. I. E. Dale’s veterinarian
establishment. Of course. His wife had asked him to be
sure and collect the family cat, Courthouse Pete. Pete, a
tiger-striped tom weighing fifteen pounds, is a well-known
character around Garden City, famous for his pugnacity,
which was the cause of his current hospitalization; a battle
lost to a boxer dog had left him with wounds necessitating
both stitches and antibiotics. Released by Dr. Dale, Pete
settled down on the front seat of his owner’s automobile
and purred all the way to Holcomb.
The detective’s destination was River Valley Farm, but
wanting something warm—a cup of hot coffee—he stopped
off at Hartman’s Café.
“Hello, handsome,” said Mrs. Hartman. “What can Ido for
you?”
“Just coffee, ma’am.”
She poured a cup. “Am Iwrong? Or have you lost a lot of
weight?”
“Some.” In fact, during the past three weeks Dewey had
dropped twenty pounds. His suits fitted as though he had
borrowed them from a stout friend, and his face, seldom
suggestive of his profession, was now not at all so; it could
have been that of an ascetic absorbed in occult pursuits.
“How do you feel?”
“Mighty fine.”
“You look awful.”
Unarguably. But no worse than the other members of the
K.B.I. entourage—Agents Duntz, Church, and Nye.
Certainly he was in better shape than Harold Nye, who,
though full of flu and fever, kept reporting for duty. Among
them, the four tired men had “checked out” some seven
hundred tips and rumors. Dewey, for example, had spent
two wearying and wasted days trying to trace that phantom
pair, the Mexicans sworn by Paul Helm to have visited Mr.
Clutter on the eve of the murders.
“Another cup, Alvin?”
“Don’t guess Iwill. Thank you, ma’am.”
But she had already fetched the pot. “It’s on the house,
Sheriff. How you look, you need it.”
At a corner table two whiskery ranch hands were playing
checkers. One of them got up and came over to the counter
where Dewey was seated. He said, “Is it true what we
heard?”
“Depends.”
“About that fellow you caught? Prowling in the Clutter
house? He’s the one responsible. That’s what we heard.”
“Ithink you heard wrong, old man. Yes, sir, Ido.”
Although the past life of Jonathan Daniel Adrian, who was
then being held in the county jail on a charge of carrying a
concealed weapon, included a period of confinement as a
mental patient in Topeka State Hospital, the data
assembled by the investigators indicated that in relation to
the Clutter case he was guilty only of an unhappy curiosity.
“Well, if he’s the wrong un, why the hell don’t you find the
right un? Igot a houseful of women won’t go to the
bathroom alone.”
Dewey had become accustomed to this brand of abuse; it
was a routine part of his existence. He swallowed the
second cup of coffee, sighed, smiled.
“Hell, I’m not cracking jokes. Imean it. Why don’t you arrest
somebody? That’s what you’re paid for.”
“Hush your meanness,” said Mrs. Hartman. “We’re all in the
same boat. Alvin’s doing good as he can.”
Dewey winked at her. “You tell him, ma’am. And much
obliged for the coffee.”
The ranch hand waited until his quarry had reached the
door, then fired a farewell volley: “If you ever run for sheriff
again, just forget my vote. ’Cause you ain’t gonna get it.”
“Hush your meanness,” said Mrs. Hartman.
A mile separates River Valley Farm from Hartman’s Café.
Dewey decided to walk it. He enjoyed hiking across wheat
fields. Normally, once or twice a week he went for long
walks on his own land, the well-loved piece of prairie where
he had always hoped to build a house, plant trees,
eventually entertain great-grandchildren. That was the
dream, but it was one his wife had lately warned him she no
longer shared; she had told him that never now would she
consider living all alone “way out there in the country.”
Dewey knew that even if he were to snare the murderers
the next day, Marie would not change her mind—for once
an awful fate had befallen friends who lived in a lonely
country house.
Of course, the Clutter family were not the first persons ever
murdered in Finney County, or even in Holcomb. Senior
members of that small community can recall “a wild goings-
on” of more than forty years ago—the Hefner Slaying. Mrs.
Sadie Truitt, the hamlet’s septuagenarian mail messenger,
who is the mother of Postmistress Clare, is expert on this
fabled affair: “August, it was. 1920. Hot as Hades. A fellow
called Tunif was working on the Finnup ranch. Walter Tunif.
He had a car, turned out to be stolen. Turned out he was a
soldier AWOL from Fort Bliss, over there in Texas. He was
a rascal, sure enough, and a lot of people suspected him.
So one evening the sheriff—them days that was Orlie
Hefner, such a fine singer, don’t you know he’s part of the
Heavenly Choir?—one evening he rode out to the Finnup
ranch to ask Tunif a few straightforward questions. Third of
August. Hot as Hades. Outcome of it was, Walter Tunif shot
the sheriff right through the heart. Poor Orlie was gone ’fore
he hit the ground. The devil who done it, he lit out of there
on one of the Finnup horses, rode east along the river.
Word spread, and men for miles around made up a posse.
Along about the next morning, they caught up with him; old
Walter Tunif. He didn’t get the chance to say how d’you do?
On account of the boys were pretty irate. They just let the
buckshot fly.”
Dewey’s own initial contact with foul play in Finney County
occurred in 1947. The incident is noted in his files as
follows: “John Carlyle Polk, a Creek Indian, 32 years of
age, resident Muskogee, Okla., killed Mary Kay Finley,
white female, 40 years of age, a waitress residing in
Garden City. Polk stabbed her with the jagged neck of a
beer bottle in a room in the Copeland Hotel, Garden City,
Kansas, 5-9-47.” A cut-and-dried description of an open-
and-shut case. Of three other murders Dewey had since
investigated, two were equally obvious (a pair of railroad
workers robbed and killed an elderly farmer, 11-1-52; a
drunken husband beat and kicked his wife to death, 6-17-
56), but the third case, as it was once conversationally
narrated by Dewey, was not without several original
touches: “It all started out at Stevens Park. Where they have
a bandstand, and under the bandstand a men’s room. Well,
this man named Mooney was walking around the park. He
was from North Carolina somewhere, just a stranger
passing through town. Anyway, he went to the rest room,
and somebody followed him inside—a boy from
hereabouts, Wilmer Lee Stebbins, twenty years old.
Afterward, Wilmer Lee always claimed Mr. Mooney made
him an unnatural suggestion. And that was why he robbed
Mr. Mooney, and knocked him down, and banged his head
on the cement floor, and why, when that didn’t finish him, he
stuck Mr. Mooney’s head in a toilet bowl and kept on
flushing till he drowned him. Maybe so. But nothing can
explain the rest of Wilmer Lee’s behavior. First off, he
buried the body a couple of miles northeast of Garden City.
Next day he dug it up and put it down fourteen miles the
other direction. Well, it went on like that, burying and
reburying. Wilmer Lee was like a dog with a bone—he just
wouldn’t let Mr. Mooney rest in peace. Finally, he dug one
grave too many; somebody saw him.” Prior to the Clutter
mystery, the four cases cited were the sum of Dewey’s
experience with murder, and measured against the case
confronting him, were as squalls preceding a hurricane.
Dewey fitted a key into the front door of the Clutter house.
Inside, the house was warm, for the heat had not been
turned off, and the shiny-floored rooms, smelling of a
lemon-scented polish, seemed only temporarily untenanted;
it was as though today were Sunday and the family might at
any moment return from church. The heirs, Mrs. English and
Mrs. Jarchow, had removed a vanload of clothing and
furniture, yet the atmosphere of a house still humanly
inhabited had not thereby been diminished. In the parlor, a
sheet of music, “Comin’ Thro’ the Rye,” stood open on the
piano rack. In the hall, a sweat-stained gray Stetson hat—
Herb’s—hung on a hat peg. Upstairs in Kenyon’s room, on
a shelf above his bed, the lenses of the dead boy’s
spectacles gleamed with reflected light.
The detective moved from room to room. He had toured the
house many times; indeed, he went out there almost every
day, and, in one sense, could be said to find these visits
pleasurable, for the place, unlike his own home, or the
sheriff’s office, with its hullabaloo, was peaceful. The
telephones, their wires still severed, were silent. The great
quiet of the prairies surrounded him. He could sit in Herb’s
parlor rocking chair, and rock and think. A few of his
conclusions were unshakable: he believed that the death of
Herb Clutter had been the criminals’ main objective, the
motive being a psychopathic hatred, or possibly a
combination of hatred and thievery, and he believed that
the commission of the murders had been a leisurely labor,
with perhaps two or more hours elapsing between the
entrance of the killers and their exit. (The coroner, Dr.
Robert Fenton, reported an appreciable difference in the
body temperatures of the victims, and, on this basis,
theorized that the order of execution had been: Mrs. Clutter,
Nancy, Kenyon, and Mr. Clutter.) Attendant upon these
beliefs was his conviction that the family had known very
well the persons who destroyed them.
During this visit Dewey paused at an upstairs window, his
attention caught by something seen in the near distance—a
scarecrow amid the wheat stubble. The scarecrow wore a
man’s hunting-cap and a dress of weather-faded flowered
calico. (Surely an old dress of Bonnie Clutter’s?) Wind
frolicked the skirt and made the scarecrow sway—made it
seem a creature forlornly dancing in the cold December
field. And Dewey was somehow reminded of Marie’s
dream. One recent morning she had served him a bungled
breakfast of sugared eggs and salted coffee, then bLarned
it all on “a silly dream”—but a dream the power of daylight
had not dispersed. “It was so real, Alvin,” she said. “As real
as this kitchen. That’s where Iwas. Here in the kitchen. I
was cooking supper, and suddenly Bonnie walked through
the door. She was wearing a blue angora sweater, and she
looked so sweet and pretty. And Isaid, ‘Oh, Bonnie . . .
Bonnie, dear . . . Ihaven’t seen you since that terrible thing
happened.’ But she didn’t answer, only looked at me in that
shy way of hers, and Ididn’t know how to go on. Under the
circumstances. So Isaid, ‘Honey, come see what I’m
making Alvin for his supper. A pot of gumbo. With shrimp
and fresh crabs. It’s just about ready. Come on, honey,
have a taste.’ But she wouldn’t. She stayed by the door
looking at me. And then—Idon’t know how to tell you
exactly, but she shut her eyes, she began to shake her
head, very slowly, and wring her hands, very slowly, and to
whimper, or whisper. Icouldn’t understand what she was
saying. But it broke my heart, Inever felt so sorry for
anyone, and Ihugged her. Isaid, ‘Please, Bonnie! Oh,
don’t, darling, don’t! If ever anyone was prepared to go to
God, it was you, Bonnie.’ But Icouldn’t comfort her. She
shook her head, and wrung her hands, and then Iheard
what she was saying. She was saying, ‘To be murdered. To
be murdered. No. No. There’s nothing worse. Nothing
worse than that. Nothing.’ ”
It was midday deep in the Mojave Desert. Perry, sitting on
a straw suitcase, was playing a harmonica. Dick was
standing at the side of a black-surfaced highway, Route 66,
his eyes fixed upon the immaculate emptiness as though
the fervor of his gaze could force motorists to materialize.
Few did, and none of those stopped for the hitchhikers.
One truck driver, bound for Needles, California, had offered
a lift, but Dick had declined. That was not the sort of “setup”
he and Perry wanted. They were waiting for some solitary
traveler in a decent car and with money in his billfold—a
stranger to rob, strangle, discard on the desert.
In the desert, sound often precedes sight. Dick heard the
dim vibrations of an oncoming, not yet visible car. Perry
heard it, too; he put the harmonica in his pocket, picked up
the straw suitcase (this, their only luggage, bulged and
sagged with the weight of Perry’s souvenirs, plus three
shirts, five pairs of white socks, a box of aspirin, a bottle of
tequila, scissors, a safety razor, and a fingernail file; all their
other belongings had either been pawned or been left with
the Mexican bartender or been shipped to Las Vegas), and
joined Dick at the side of the road. They watched. Now the
car appeared, and grew until it became a blue Dodge
sedan with a single passenger, a bald, skinny man. Perfect.
Dick raised his hand and waved. The Dodge slowed down,
and Dick gave the man a sumptuous smile. The car almost,
but not quite, came to a stop, and the driver leaned out the
window, looking them up and down. The impression they
made was evidently alarming. (After a fifty-hour bus ride
from Mexico City to Barstow, California, and half a day of
trekking across the Mojave, both hikers were bearded,
stark, dusty figures.) The car leaped forward and sped on.
Dick cupped his hands around his mouth and called out,
“You’re a lucky bastard!” Then he laughed and hoisted the
suitcase to his shoulder. Nothing could get him really angry,
because, as he later recalled, he was “too glad to be back
in the good ol’ U.S.A.” Anyway, another man in another car
would come along.
Perry produced his harmonica (his since yesterday, when
he stole it from a Barstow variety store) and played the
opening bars of what had come to be their “marching
music”; the song was one of Perry’s favorites, and he had
taught Dick all five stanzas. In step, and side by side, they
swung along the highway, singing, “Mine eyes have seen
the glory of the coming of the Lord; He is trampling out the
vintage where the grapes of wrath are stored.” Through the
silence of the desert, their hard, young voices rang: “Glory!
Glory! Hallelujah! Glory! Glory! Hallelujah!”