III
ANSWER
The young man’s name was Floyd Wells, and he was short
and nearly chinless. He had attempted several careers, as
soldier, ranch hand, mechanic, thief, the last of which had
earned him a sentence of three to five years in Kansas
State Penitentiary. On the evening of Tuesday, November
17, 1959, he was lying in his cell with a pair of radio
earphones clamped to his head. He was listening to a
news broadcast, but the announcer’s voice and the
drabness of the day’s events (“Chancellor Konrad
Adenauer arrived in London today for talks with Prime
Minister Harold Macmillan. . . . President Eisenhower put in
seventy minutes going over space problems and the
budget for space exploration with Dr. T. Keith Glennan”)
were luring him toward sleep. His drowsiness instantly
vanished when he heard, “Officers investigating the tragic
slaying of four members of the Herbert W. Clutter family
have appealed to the public for any information which might
aid in solving this baffling crime. Clutter, his wife, and their
two teen-age children were found murdered in their farm
home near Garden City early last Sunday morning. Each
had been bound, gagged, and shot through the head with a
.12-gauge shotgun. Investigating officials admit they can
discover no motive for the crime, termed by Logan Sanford,
Director of the Kansas Bureau of Investigation, as the most
vicious in the history of Kansas. Clutter, a prominent wheat
grower and former Eisenhower appointee to the Federal
Farm Credit Board . . .”
Wells was stunned. As he was eventually to describe his
reaction, he “didn’t hardly believe it.” Yet he had good
reason to, for not only had he known the murdered family,
he knew very well who had murdered them.
It had begun a long time ago—eleven years ago, in the
autumn of 1948, when Wells was nineteen. He was “sort of
drifting around the country, taking jobs as they came,” as he
recalled it. “One way and another, Ifound myself out there in
western Kansas. Near the Colorado border. Iwas hunting
work, and asking round, Iheard maybe they could use a
hand over to River Valley Farm—that’s how he called his
place, Mr. Clutter did. Sure enough, he put me on. Istayed
there Iguess a year—all that winter, anyway—and when I
left it was just ’cause Iwas feeling kind of footy. Wanted to
move on. Not account of any quarrel with Mr. Clutter. He
treated me fine, same as he treated everybody that worked
for him; like, if you was a little short before payday, he’d
always hand you a ten or a five. He paid good wages, and
if you deserved it he was quick to give you a bonus. The
fact is, Iliked Mr. Clutter much as any man Iever met. The
whole family. Mrs. Clutter and the four kids. When Iknew
them, the youngest two, the ones that got killed—Nancy and
the little boy what wore glasses—they were only babies,
maybe five or six years old. The other two—one was called
Beverly, the other girl Idon’t remember her name—they
were already in high school. A nice family, real nice. Inever
forgot them. When Ileft there, it was sometime in 1949. I
got married, Igot divorced, the Army took me, other stuff
happened, time went by, you might say, and in 1959—
June, 1959, ten years since Ilast seen Mr. Clutter—Igot
sent to Lansing. Because of breaking into this appliance
store. Electrical appliances. What Ihad in mind was, I
wanted to get hold of some electrical lawn mowers. Not to
sell. Iwas going to start a lawnmower rental service. That
way, see, I’d have had my own permanent little business.
Course nothing come of it—’cept Idrew a three-to-five. If I
hadn’t, then Inever would have met Dick, and maybe Mr.
Clutter wouldn’t be in his grave. But there you are. There it
is. Icome to meet Dick.
“He was the first fellow Icelled with. We celled together I
guess a month. June and part of July. He was just finishing
a three-to-five—due for parole in August. He talked a lot
about what he planned to do when he got out. Said he
thought he might go to Nevada, one of them missile-base
towns, buy hisself a uniform, and pass hisself off as a Air
Force officer. So he could hang out a regular washline of
hot paper. That was one idea he told me. (Never thought
much of it myself. He was smart, Idon’t deny, but he didn’t
look the part. Like no Air Force officer.) Other times, he
mentioned this friend of his. Perry. A half-Indian fellow he
used to cell with. And the big deals him and Perry might pull
when they got together again. Inever met him—Perry.
Never saw him. He’d already left Lansing, was out on
parole. But Dick always said if the chance of a real big
score came up, he could rely on Perry Smith to go partners.
“Idon’t exactly recall how Mr. Clutter first got mentioned. It
must have been when we were discussing jobs, different
kinds of work we’d done. Dick, he was a trained car
mechanic, and mostly that was the work he’d done. Only,
once he’d had a job driving a hospital ambulance. He was
full of brag about that. About nurses, and all what he’d done
with them in the back of the ambulance. Anyway, Iinformed
him how I’d worked a year on a considerable wheat spread
in western Kansas. For Mr. Clutter. He wanted to know if
Mr. Clutter was a wealthy man. Yes, Isaid. Yes, he was. In
fact, Isaid, Mr. Clutter had once told me that he got rid of
ten thousand dollars in one week. Imean, said it
sometimes cost him ten thousand dollars a week to run his
operation. After that, Dick never stopped asking me about
the family. How many was they? What ages would the kids
be now? Exactly how did you get to the house? How was it
laid out? Did Mr. Clutter keep a safe? Iwon’t deny it—Itold
him he did. Because Iseemed to remember a sort of
cabinet, or safe, or something, right behind the desk in the
room Mr. Clutter used as an office. Next thing Iknew, Dick
was talking about killing Mr. Clutter. Said him and Perry
was gonna go out there and rob the place, and they was
gonna kill all witnesses—the Clutters, and anybody else
that happened to be around. He described to me a dozen
times how he was gonna do it, how him and Perry was
gonna tie them people up and gun them down. Itold him,
‘Dick, you’ll never get by with it.’ But Ican’t honestly say I
tried to persuade him different. Because Inever for a
minute believed he meant to carry it out. Ithought it was just
talk. Like you hear plenty of in Lansing. That’s about all you
do hear: what a fellow’s gonna do when he gets out—the
holdups and robberies and so forth. It’s nothing but brag,
mostly. Nobody takes it serious. That’s why, when Iheard
what Iheard on the earphones—well, Ididn’t hardly believe
it. Still and all, it happened. Just like Dick said it would.”
That was Floyd Wells’ story, though as yet he was far from
telling it. He was afraid to, for if the other prisoners heard of
his bearing tales to the warden, then his life, as he put it,
“wouldn’t be worth a dead coyote.” A week passed. He
monitored the radio, he followed the newspaper accounts
—and in one of them read that a Kansas paper, the
Hutchinson News, was offering a reward of one thousand
dollars for any information leading to the capture and
conviction of the person or persons guilty of the Clutter
murders. An interesting item; it almost inspired Wells to
speak. But he was still too much afraid, and his fear was
not solely of the other prisoners. There was also the chance
that the authorities might charge him with being an
accessory to the crime. After all, it was he who had guided
Dick to the Clutters’ door; certainly it could be claimed that
he had been aware of Dick’s intentions. However one
viewed it, his situation was curious, his excuses
questionable. So he said nothing, and ten more days went
by. December replaced November, and those investigating
the case remained, according to increasingly brief
newspaper reports (radio newscasters had ceased to
mention the subject), as bewildered, as virtually clueless, as
they had been the morning of the tragic discovery.
But he knew. Presently, tortured by a need to “tell
somebody,” he confided in another prisoner. “A particular
friend. A Catholic. Kind of very religious. He asked me,
‘Well, what are you gonna do, Floyd?’ Isaid, Well, Ididn’t
rightly know—what did he think Iought to do? Well, he was
all for me going to the proper people. Said he didn’t think I
ought to live with something like that on my mind. And he
said Icould do it without anybody inside guessing Iwas the
one told. Said he’d fix it. So the next day he got word to the
deputy warden—told him Iwanted to be ‘called out.’ Told
the deputy if he called me to his office on some pretext or
other, maybe Icould tell him who killed the Clutters. Sure
enough, the deputy sent for me. Iwas scared, but I
remembered Mr. Clutter, and how he’d never done me no
harm, how at Christmas he’d give me a little purse with fifty
dollars in it. Italked to the deputy. Then Itold the warden
hisself. And while Iwas still sitting there, right there in
Warden Hand’s office, he picked up the telephone—”
The person to whom Warden Hand telephoned was Logan
Sanford. Sanford listened, hung up, issued several orders,
then placed a call of his own to Alvin Dewey. That evening,
when Dewey left his office in the courthouse at Garden City,
he took home with him a manila envelope.
When Dewey got home, Marie was in the kitchen preparing
supper. The moment he appeared, she launched into an
account of household upsets. The family cat had attacked
the cocker spaniel that lived across the street, and now it
seemed as if one of the spaniel’s eyes might be seriously
damaged. And Paul, their nine-year-old, had fallen out of a
tree. It was a wonder he was alive. And then their twelve-
year-old, Dewey’s namesake, had gone into the yard to
burn rubbish and started a blaze that had threatened the
neighborhood. Someone—she didn’t know who—had
actually called the Fire Department.
While his wife described these unhappy episodes, Dewey
poured two cups of coffee. Suddenly, Marie stopped in the
middle of a sentence and stared at him. His face was
flushed, and she could tell that he was elated. She said,
“Alvin. Oh, honey. Is it good news?” Without comment, he
gave her the manila envelope. Her hands were wet; she
dried them, sat down at the kitchen table, sipped her
coffee, opened the envelope, and took out photographs of
a blond young man and a darkhaired, dark-skinned young
man—police-made “mug shots.” A pair of semi-coded
dossiers accompanied the photographs. The one for the
fair-headed man read:
Hickock, Richard Eugene (WM) 28. KBI97093; FBI859
273 A. Address: Edgerton, Kansas. Birthdate 6-6-31.
Birthplace: K.C., Kans. Height: 5-10. Weight: 175. Hair:
Blond. Eyes: Blue. Build: Stout. Comp: Ruddy. Occup: Car
Painter. Crime: Cheat & Defr. & Bad Checks. Paroled: 8-
13-59. By: So. K.C.K.
The second description read:
Smith, Perry Edward (WM) 27-59. Birthplace: Nevada.
Height: 5-4. Weight: 156. Hair: D. Brn. Crime: B&E.
Arrested: (blank). By: (blank). Disposition: Sent KSP 3-13-
56 from Phillips Co. 5-10 yrs. Rec. 3-14-56. Paroled: 7-6-
59.
Marie examined the front-view and profile photographs of
Smith: an arrogant face, tough, yet not entirely, for there
was about it a peculiar refinement; the lips and nose
seemed nicely made, and she thought the eyes, with their
moist, dreamy expression, rather pretty—rather, in an
actorish way, sensitive. Sensitive, and something more:
“mean.” Though not as mean, as forbiddingly “criminal,” as
the eyes of Hickock, Richard Eugene. Marie, transfixed by
Hickock’s eyes, was reminded of a childhood incident—of
a bobcat she’d once seen caught in a trap, and of how,
though she’d wanted to release it, the cat’s eyes, radiant
with pain and hatred, had drained her of pity and filled her
with terror. “Who are they?” Marie asked.
Dewey told her Floyd Wells’ story, and at the end he said,
“Funny. The past three weeks, that’s the angle we’ve
concentrated on. Tracking down every man who ever
worked on the Clutter place. Now, the way it’s turned out, it
just seems like a piece of luck. But a few days more and
we would’ve hit this Wells. Found he was in prison. We
would’ve got the truth then. Hell, yes.”
“Maybe it isn’t the truth,” Marie said. Dewey and the
eighteen men assisting him had pursued hundreds of leads
to barren destinations, and she hoped to warn him against
another disappointment, for she was worried about his
health. His state of mind was bad; he was emaciated; and
he was smoking sixty cigarettes a day.
“No. Maybe not,” Dewey said. “But Ihave a hunch.”
His tone impressed her; she looked again at the faces on
the kitchen table. “Think of him,” she said, placing a finger
against the front-view portrait of the blond young man.
“Think of those eyes. Coming toward you.” Then she
pushed the pictures back into their envelope. “Iwish you
hadn’t shown me.”
Later that same evening, another woman, in another
kitchen, put aside a sock she was darning, removed a pair
of plastic-rimmed spectacles, and leveling them at a visitor,
said, “Ihope you find him, Mr. Nye. For his own sake. We
have two sons, and he’s one of them, our firstborn. We love
him. But . . . Oh, Irealized. Irealized he wouldn’t have
packed up. Run off. Without a word to anybody—his daddy
or his brother. Unless he was in trouble again. What makes
him do it? Why?” She glanced across the small, stove-
warmed room at a gaunt figure hunched in a rocking chair
—Walter Hickock, her husband and the father of Richard
Eugene. He was a man with faded, defeated eyes and
rough hands; when he spoke, his voice sounded as if it
were seldom used.
“Was nothing wrong with my boy, Mr. Nye,” Mr. Hickock
said. “An outstanding athlete-always on the first team at
school. Basketball! Baseball! Football! Dick was always
the star player. A pretty good student, too, with A marks in
several subjects. History. Mechanical drawing. After he
graduated from high school—June, 1949—he wanted to go
on to college. Study to be an engineer. But we couldn’t do
it. Plain didn’t have the money. Never have had any money.
Our farm here, it’s only forty-four acres—we hardly can
scratch a living. Iguess Dick resented it, not getting to
college. The first job he had was with Santa Fe Railways, in
Kansas City. Made seventy-five dollars a week. He figured
that was enough to get married on, so him and Carol got
married. She wasn’t but sixteen; he wasn’t but nineteen
hisself. Inever thought nothing good would come of it.
Didn’t, neither.”
Mrs. Hickock, a plump woman with a soft, round face
unmarred by a lifetime of dawn-to-dark endeavor,
reproached him. “Three precious little boys, our
grandchildren—there, that’s what came of it. And Carol is a
lovely girl. She’s not to blame.”
Mr. Hickock continued, “Him and Carol rented a good-size
house, bought a fancy car—they was in debt all the time.
Even though pretty soon Dick was making better money
driving a hospital ambulance. Later on, the Markl Buick
Company, a big outfit there in Kansas City, they hired him.
As a mechanic and car painter. But him and Carol lived too
high, kept buying stuff they couldn’t nohow afford, and Dick
got to writing checks. Istill think the reason he started doing
stunts such as that was connected with the smash-up.
Concussed his head in a car smash-up. After that, he
wasn’t the same boy. Gambling, writing bad checks. Inever
knew him to do them things before. And it was along about
then he took up with this other gal. The one he divorced
Carol for, and was his second wife.”
Mrs. Hickock said, “Dick couldn’t help that. You remember
how Margaret Edna was attracted to him.”
“ ’Cause a woman likes you, does that mean you got to get
caught?” Mr. Hickock said. “Well, Mr. Nye, Iexpect you
know as much about it as we do. Why our boy was sent to
prison. Locked away seventeen months, and all he done
was borrow a hunting rifle. From the house of a neighbor
here. He had no idea to steal it, Idon’t give a damn what
nobody says. And that was the ruination of him. When he
came out of Lansing, he was a plain stranger to me. You
couldn’t talk to him. The whole world was against Dick
Hickock—that’s how he figured. Even the second wife, she
left him—filed for divorce while he was in prison. Just the
same, lately there, he seemed to be settling down. Working
for the Bob Sands Body Shop, over in Olathe. Living here
at home with us, getting to bed early, not violating his
parole any shape or fashion. I’ll tell you, Mr. Nye, I’ve not got
long, I’m with cancer, and Dick knowed that—leastways, he
knowed I’m sickly—and not a month ago, right before he
took off, he told me, ‘Dad, you’ve been a pretty good old
dad to me. I’m not ever gonna do nothing more to hurt you.’
He meant it, too. That boy has plenty of good inside him. If
ever you seen him on a football field, if ever you seen him
play with his children, you wouldn’t doubt me. Lord, Iwish
the Lord could tell me, because Idon’t know what
happened.”
His wife said, “Ido,” resumed her darning, and was forced
by tears to stop. “That friend of his. That’s what happened.”
The visitor, K.B.I. Agent Harold Nye, busied himself
scribbling in a shorthand notebook—a notebook already
well filled with the results of a long day spent probing the
accusations of Floyd Wells. Thus far the facts ascertained
corroborated Wells’ story most persuasively. On November
20 the suspect Richard Eugene Hickock had gone on a
Kansas City shopping spree during which he had passed
not fewer than “seven pieces of hot paper.” Nye had called
on all the reported victims—salesmen of cameras and of
radio and television equipment, the proprietor of a jewelry
shop, a clerk in a clothing store—and when in each
instance the witness was shown photographs of Hickock
and Perry Edward Smith, he had identified the former as
the author of the spurious checks, the latter as his “silent”
accomplice. (One deceived salesman said, “He [Hickock]
did the work. A very smooth talker, very convincing. The
other one—Ithought he might be a foreigner, a Mexican
maybe—he never opened his mouth.”)
Nye had next driven to the suburban village of Olathe,
where he interviewed Hickock’s last employer, the owner of
the Bob Sands Body Shop. “Yes, he worked here,” said Mr.
Sands. “From August until— Well, Inever saw him after the
nineteenth of November, or maybe it was the twentieth. He
left without giving me any notice whatever. Just took off—I
don’t know where to, and neither does his dad. Surprised?
Well, yes. Yes, Iwas. We were on a fairly friendly basis.
Dick kind of has a way with him, you know. He can be very
likable. Once in a while he used to come to our house. Fact
is, a week before he left, we had some people over, a little
party, and Dick brought this friend he had visiting him, a
boy from Nevada—Perry Smith was his name. He could
play the guitar real nice. He played the guitar and sang
some songs, and him and Dick entertained everybody with
a weight-lifting act. Perry Smith, he’s a little fellow, not much
over five feet high, but he could just about pick up a horse.
No, they didn’t seem nervous, neither one. I’d say they were
enjoying themselves. The exact date? Sure Iremember. It
was the thirteenth. Friday, the thirteenth of November.”
From there, Nye steered his car northward along raw
country roads. As he neared the Hickock farm, he stopped
at several neighboring homesteads, ostensibly to ask
directions, actually to make inquiries concerning the
suspect. One farmer’s wife said, “Dick Hickock! Don’t talk
to me about Dick Hickock! If ever Imet the devil! Steal?
Steal the weights off a dead man’s eyes! His mother,
though, Eunice, she’s a fine woman. Heart big as a barn.
His daddy, too. Both of them plain, honest people. Dick
would’ve gone to jail more times than you can count, except
nobody around here ever wanted to prosecute. Out of
respect for his folks.”
Dusk had fallen when Nye knocked at the door of Walter
Hickock’s weather-grayed four-room farmhouse. It was as
though some such visit had been expected. Mr. Hickock
invited the detective into the kitchen, and Mrs. Hickock
offered him coffee. Perhaps if they had known the true
meaning of the caller’s presence, the reception tendered
him would have been less gracious, more guarded. But
they did not know, and during the hours the three sat
conversing, the name Clutter was never mentioned, or the
word murder. The parents accepted what Nye implied—
that parole violation and financial fraud were all that
motivated his pursuit of their son.
“Dick brought him [Perry] home one evening, and told us he
was a friend just off a bus from Las Vegas, and he wanted
to know couldn’t he sleep here, stay here awhile,” Mrs.
Hickock said. “No, sir, Iwouldn’t have him in the house.
One look and Isaw what he was. With his perfume. And his
oily hair. It was clear as day where Dick had met him.
According to the conditions of his parole, he wasn’t
supposed to associate with anybody he’d met up there
[Lansing]. Iwarned Dick, but he wouldn’t listen. He found a
room for his friend at the Hotel Olathe, in Olathe, and after
that Dick was with him every spare minute. Once they went
off on a weekend trip. Mr. Nye, certain as I’m sitting here,
Perry Smith was the one put him up to writing them
checks.”
Nye shut his notebook and put his pen in his pocket, and
both his hands as well, for his hands were shaking from
excitement. “Now, on this weekend trip. Where did they
go?”
“Fort Scott,” Mr. Hickock said, naming a Kansas town with
a military history. “The way Iunderstood it, Perry Smith has
a sister lives in Fort Scott. She was supposed to be holding
a piece of money belonged to him. Fifteen hundred dollars
was the sum mentioned. That was the main reason he’d
come to Kansas, to collect this money his sister was
holding. So Dick drove him down there to get it. It was only
a overnight trip. He was back home a little before noon
Sunday. Time for Sunday dinner.”
“Isee,” said Nye. “An overnight trip. Which means they left
here sometime Saturday. That would be Saturday,
November fourteenth?”
The old man agreed.
“And returned Sunday, November fifteenth?”
“Sunday noon.”
Nye pondered the mathematics involved, and was
encouraged by the conclusion he came to: that within a
time span of twenty or twenty-four hours, the suspects could
have made a round-trip journey of rather more than eight
hundred miles, and, in the process, murdered four people.
“Now, Mr. Hickock,” Nye said. “On Sunday, when your son
came home, was he alone? Or was Perry Smith with him?”
“No, he was alone. He said he’d left Perry off at the Hotel
Olathe.”
Nye, whose normal voice is cuttingly nasal and naturally
intimidating, was attempting a subdued timbre, a
disarming, throwaway style. “And do you remember—did
anything in his manner strike you as unusual? Different?”
“Who?”
“Your son.”
“When?”
“When he returned from Fort Scott.”
Mr. Hickock ruminated. Then he said, “He seemed the
same as ever. Soon as he came in, we sat down to dinner.
He was mighty hungry. Started piling his plate before I’d
finished the blessing. Iremarked on it, said, ‘Dick, you’re
shoveling it in as fast as you can work your elbow. Don’t
you mean to leave nothing for the rest of us?’ Course, he’s
always been a big eater. Pickles. He can eat a whole tub of
pickles.”
“And after dinner what did he do?”
“Fell asleep,” said Mr. Hickock, and appeared to be
moderately taken aback by his own reply. “Fell fast asleep.
And Iguess you could say that was unusual. We’d gathered
round to watch a basketball game. On the TV. Me and Dick
and our other boy, David. Pretty soon Dick was snoring like
a buzz saw, and Isaid to his brother, ‘Lord, Inever thought
I’d live to see the day Dick would go to sleep at a
basketball game.’ Did, though. Slept straight through it.
Only woke up long enough to eat some cold supper, and
right after went off to bed.”
Mrs. Hickock rethreaded her darning needle; her husband
rocked his rocker and sucked on an unlit pipe. The
detective’s trained eyes roamed the scrubbed and humble
room. In a corner, a gun stood propped against the wall; he
had noticed it before. Rising, reaching for it, he said, “You
do much hunting, Mr. Hickock?”
“That’s his gun. Dick’s. Him and David go out once in a
while. After rabbits, mostly.”
It was a .12-gauge Savage shotgun, Model 300; a
delicately etched scene of pheasants in flight ornamented
the handle.
“How long has Dick had it?”
The question aroused Mrs. Hickock. “That gun cost over a
hundred dollars. Dick bought it on credit, and now the store
won’t have it back, even though it’s not hardly a month old
and only been used the one time—the start of November,
when him and David went to Grinnell on a pheasant shoot.
He used our names to buy it—his daddy let him—so here
we are, liable for the payments, and when you think of
Walter, sick as he is, and all the things we need, all we do
without . . .” She held her breath, as though trying to halt an
attack of hiccups. “Are you sure you won’t have a cup of
coffee, Mr. Nye? It’s no trouble.”
The detective leaned the gun against the wall, relinquishing
it, although he felt certain it was the weapon that had killed
the Clutter family. “Thank you, but it’s late, and Ihave to
drive to Topeka,” he said, and then, consulting his
notebook, “Now, I’ll just run through this, see if Ihave it
straight. Perry Smith arrived in Kansas Thursday, the twelfth
of November. Your son claimed this person came here to
collect a sum of money from a sister residing in Fort Scott.
That Saturday the two drove to Fort Scott, where they
remained overnight—Iassume in the home of the sister?”
Mr. Hickock said, “No. They never could find her. Seems
like she’d moved.”
Nye smiled. “Nevertheless, they stayed away overnight.
And during the week that followed—that is, from the
fifteenth to the twenty-first—Dick continued to see his friend
Perry Smith, but otherwise, or as far as you know, he
maintained a normal routine: lived at home and reported to
work every day. On the twenty-first he disappeared, and so
did Perry Smith. And since then you’ve not heard from him?
He hasn’t written you?”
“He’s afraid to,” said Mrs. Hickock. “Ashamed and afraid.”
“Ashamed?”
“Of what he’s done. Of how he’s hurt us again. And afraid
because he thinks we won’t forgive him. Like we always
have. And will. You have children, Mr. Nye?”
He nodded.
“Then you know how it is.”
“One thing more. Have you any idea, any at all, where your
son might have gone?”
“Open a map,” said Mr. Hickock. “Point your finger—maybe
that’s it.”
It was late afternoon, and the driver of the car, a middle-
aged traveling salesman who shall here be known as Mr.
Bell, was tired. He longed to stop for a short nap. However,
he was only a hundred miles from his destination—Omaha,
Nebraska, the headquarters of the large meat packing
company for which he worked. A company rule forbade its
salesmen to pick up hitchhikers, but Mr. Bell often
disobeyed it, particularly if he was bored and drowsy, so
when he saw the two young men standing by the side of the
road, he immediately braked his car.
They looked to him like “O.K. boys.” The taller of the two, a
wiry type with dirty-blond, crew-cut hair, had an engaging
grin and a polite manner, and his partner, the “runty” one,
holding a harmonica in his right hand and, in his left, a
swollen straw suitcase, seemed “nice enough,” shy but
amiable. In any event, Mr. Bell, entirely unaware of his
guests’ intentions, which included throttling him with a belt
and leaving him, robbed of his car, his money, and his life,
concealed in a prairie grave, was glad to have company,
somebody to talk to and keep him awake until he arrived at
Omaha.
He introduced himself, then asked them their names. The
affable young man with whom he was sharing the front seat
said his name was Dick. “And that’s Perry,” he said,
winking at Perry, who was seated directly behind the driver.
“Ican ride you boys as far as Omaha.”
Dick said, “Thank you, sir. Omaha’s where we were
headed. Hoped we might find some work.”
What kind of work were they hunting? The salesman
thought perhaps he could help.
Dick said, “I’m a first-class car painter. Mechanic, too. I’m
used to making real money. My buddy and me, we just
been down in Old Mexico. Our idea was, we wanted to live
there. But hell, they don’t pay any wages. Nothing a white
man could live off.”
Ah, Mexico. Mr. Bell explained that he had honeymooned in
Cuernavaca. “We always wanted to go back. But it’s hard
to move around when you’ve got five kids.”
Perry, as he later recalled, thought, Five kids—well, too
bad. And listening to Dick’s conceited chatter, hearing him
start to describe his Mexican “amorous conquests,” he
thought how “queer” it was, “egomaniacal.” Imagine going
all out to impress a man you were going to kill, a man who
wouldn’t be alive ten minutes from now—not if the plan he
and Dick had devised went smoothly. And why shouldn’t it?
The setup was ideal—exactly what they had been looking
for during the three days it had taken them to hitchhike from
California to Nevada and across Nevada and Wyoming
into Nebraska. Until now, however, a suitable victim had
eluded them. Mr. Bell was the first prosperous-seeming
solitary traveler to offer them a lift. Their other hosts had
been either truck drivers or soldiers—and, once, a pair of
Negro prizefighters driving a lavender Cadillac. But Mr. Bell
was perfect. Perry felt inside a pocket of the leather
windbreaker he was wearing. The pocket bulged with a
bottle of Bayer aspirin and with a jagged, fist-size rock
wrapped in a yellow cotton cowboy handkerchief. He
unfastened his belt, a Navajo belt, silver-buckled and
studded with turquoise beads; he took it off, flexed it,
placed it across his knees. He waited. He watched the
Nebraska prairie rolling by, and fooled with his harmonica
—made up a tune and played it and waited for Dick to
pronounce the agreed-upon signal: “Hey, Perry, pass me a
match.” Whereupon Dick was supposed to seize the
steering wheel, while Perry, wielding his handkerchief-
wrapped rock, belabored the salesman’s head—“opened it
up.” Later, along some quiet side road, use would be made
of the belt with the sky-blue beads.
Meanwhile, Dick and the condemned man were trading
dirty jokes. Their laughter irritated Perry; he especially
disliked Mr. Bell’s outbursts—hearty barks that sounded
very much like the laughter of Tex John Smith, Perry’s
father. The memory of his father’s laughter increased his
tension; his head hurt, his knees ached. He chewed three
aspirin and swallowed them dry. Jesus! He thought he
might vomit, or faint; he felt certain he would if Dick delayed
“the party” much longer. The light was dimming, the road
was straight, with neither house nor human being in view—
nothing but land winter-stripped and as somber as sheet
iron. Now was the time, now. He stared at Dick, as though
to communicate this realization, and a few small signs—a
twitching eyelid, a mustache of sweat drops—told him that
Dick had already reached the same conclusion.
And yet when Dick next spoke, it was only to launch another
joke. “Here’s a riddle. The riddle is: What’s the similarity
between a trip to the bathroom and a trip to the cemetery?”
He grinned. “Give up?”
“Give up.”
“When you gotta go, you gotta go!”
Mr. Bell barked.
“Hey, Perry, pass me a match.”
But just as Perry raised his hand, and the rock was on the
verge of descent, something extraordinary occurred—what
Perry later called “a goddam miracle.” The miracle was the
sudden appearance of a third hitchhiker, a Negro soldier,
for whom the charitable salesman stopped. “Say, that’s
pretty cute,” he said as his savior ran toward the car. “When
you gotta go, you gotta go!”
December 16, 1959, Las Vegas, Nevada. Age and
weather had removed the first letter and the last—an R and
an S—thereby coining a somewhat ominous word: OOM.
The word, faintly present upon a sun-warped sign, seemed
appropriate to the place it publicized, which was, as Harold
Nye wrote in his official K.B.I. report, “run-down and shabby,
the lowest type of hotel or rooming house.” The report
continued: “Until a few years ago (according to information
supplied by the Las Vegas police), it was one of the
biggest cathouses in the West. Then fire destroyed the
main building, and the remaining portion was converted
into a cheap-rent rooming house.” The “lobby” was
unfurnished, except for a cactus plant six feet tall and a
makeshift reception desk; it was also uninhabited. The
detective clapped his hands. Eventually, a voice, female,
but not very feminine, shouted, “I’m coming,” but it was five
minutes before the woman appeared. She wore a soiled
housecoat and high-heeled gold leather sandals. Curlers
pinioned her thinning yellowish hair. Her face was broad,
muscular, rouged, powdered. She was carrying a can of
Miller High Life beer; she smelled of beer and tobacco and
recently applied nail varnish. She was seventy-four years
old, but in Nye’s opinion, “looked younger—maybe ten
minutes younger.” She stared at him, his trim brown suit, his
brown snapbrim hat. When he displayed his badge, she
was amused; her lips parted, and Nye glimpsed two rows
of fake teeth. “Uh-huh. That’s what Ifigured,” she said. “O.K.
Let’s hear it.”
He handed her a photograph of Richard Hickock. “Know
him?”
A negative grunt.
“Or him?”
She said, “Uh-huh. He’s stayed here a coupla times. But
he’s not here now. Checked out over a month ago. You
wanna see the register?”
Nye leaned against the desk and watched the landlady’s
long and lacquered fingernails search a page of pencil-
scribbled names. Las Vegas was the first of three places
that his employers wished him to visit. Each had been
chosen because of its connection with the history of Perry
Smith. The two others were Reno, where it was thought that
Smith’s father lived, and San Francisco, the home of
Smith’s sister, who shall here be known as Mrs. Frederic
Johnson. Though Nye planned to interview these relatives,
and anyone else who might have knowledge of the
suspect’s whereabouts, his main objective was to obtain
the aid of the local law agencies. On arriving in Las Vegas,
for example, he had discussed the Clutter case with
Lieutenant B. J. Handlon, Chief of the Detective Division of
the Las Vegas Police Department. The lieutenant had then
written a memorandum ordering all police personnel to be
on the alert for Hickock and Smith: “Wanted in Kansas for
parole violation, and said to be driving a 1949 Chevrolet
bearing Kansas license JO-58269. These men are
probably armed and should be considered dangerous.”
Also, Handlon had assigned a detective to help Nye “case
the pawnbrokers”; as he said, there was “always a pack of
them in any gambling town.” Together, Nye and the Las
Vegas detective had checked every pawn ticket issued
during the past month. Specifically, Nye hoped to find a
Zenith portable radio believed to have been stolen from the
Clutter house on the night of the crime, but he had no luck
with that. One broker, though, remembered Smith (“He’s
been in and out of here going on a good ten years”), and
was able to produce a ticket for a bearskin rug pawned
during the first week in November. It was from this ticket
that Nye had obtained the address of the rooming house.
“Registered October thirtieth,” the landlady said. “Pulled out
November eleventh.” Nye glanced at Smith’s signature. The
ornateness of it, the mannered swoops and swirls,
surprised him—a reaction that the landlady apparently
divined, for she said, “Uh-huh. And you oughta hear him
talk. Big, long words coming at you in this kinda lispy,
whispery voice. Quite a personality. What you got against
him—a nice little punk like that?”
“Parole violation.”
“Uh-huh. Came all the way from Kansas on a parole case.
Well, I’m just a dizzy blonde. Ibelieve you. But Iwouldn’t tell
that tale to any brunettes.” She raised the beer can,
emptied it, then thoughtfully rolled the empty can between
her veined and freckled hands. “Whatever it is, it ain’t
nothing big-big. Couldn’t be. Inever saw the man yet I
couldn’t gauge his shoe size. This one, he’s only a punk.
Little punk tried to sweet-talk me out of paying rent the last
week he was here.” She chuckled, presumably at the
absurdity of such an ambition.
The detective asked how much Smith’s room had cost.
“Regular rate. Nine bucks a week. Plus a fifty-cent key
deposit. Strictly cash. Strictly in advance.”
“While he was here, what did he do with himself? Does he
have any friends?” Nye asked.
“You think Ikeep an eye on every crawly that comes in
here?” the landlady retorted. “Bums. Punks. I’m not
interested. Igot a daughter married big-big.” Then she
said, “No, he doesn’t have any friends. Least, Inever
noticed him run around with anybody special. This last time
he was here, he spent most every day tinkering with his car.
Had it parked out front there. An old Ford. Looked like it
was made before he was born. He gave it a paint job.
Painted the top part black and the rest silver. Then he wrote
‘For Sale’ on the windshield. One day Iheard a sucker stop
and offer him forty bucks—that’s forty more than it was
worth. But he allowed he couldn’t take less than ninety. Said
he needed the money for a bus ticket. Just before he left I
heard some colored man bought it.”
“He said he needed the money for a bus ticket. But you
don’t know where it was he wanted to go?”
She pursed her lips, hung a cigarette between them, but
her eyes stayed on Nye. “Play fair. Any money on the table?
A reward?” She waited for an answer; when none arrived,
she seemed to weigh the probabilities and decide in favor
of proceeding. “Because Igot the impression wherever he
was going he didn’t mean to stay long. That he meant to cut
back here. Sorta been expecting him to turn up any day.”
She nodded toward the interior of the establishment.
“Come along, and I’ll show you why.”
Stairs. Gray halls. Nye sniffed the odors, separating one
from another: lavatory disinfectant, alcohol, dead cigars.
Beyond one door, a drunken tenant wailed and sang in the
firm grip of either gladness or grief. “Boil down, Dutch! Turn
it off or out you go!” the woman yelled. “Here,” she said to
Nye, leading him into a darkened storage room. She
switched on a light. “Over there. That box. He asked would I
keep it till he came back.”
It was a cardboard box, unwrapped but tied with cord. A
declaration, a warning somewhat in the spirit of an
Egyptian curse, was crayoned across the top: “Beware!
Property of Perry E. Smith! Beware!” Nye undid the cord;
the knot, he was unhappy to see, was not the same as the
half hitch that the killers had used when binding the Clutter
family. He parted the flaps. A cockroach emerged, and the
landlady stepped on it, squashing it under the heel of her
gold leather sandal. “Hey!” she said as he carefully
extracted and slowly examined Smith’s possessions. “The
sneak. That’s my towel.” In addition to the towel, the
meticulous Nye listed in his notebook: “One dirty pillow,
‘Souvenir of Honolulu’; one pink baby blanket; one pair
khaki trousers; one aluminum pan with pancake turner.”
Other oddments included a scrapbook thick with
photographs clipped from physical-culture magazines
(sweaty studies of weight-lifting weightlifters) and, inside a
shoebox, a collection of medicines: rinses and powders
employed to combat trench mouth, and also a mystifying
amount of aspirin—at least a dozen containers, several of
them empty.
“Junk,” the landlady said. “Nothing but trash.”
True, it was valueless stuff even to a clue-hungry detective.
Still, Nye was glad to have seen it; each item—the
palliatives for sore gums, the greasy Honolulu pillow—gave
him a clearer impression of the owner and his lonely, mean
life.
The next day in Reno, preparing his official notes, Nye
wrote: “At 9:00 A.M. the reporting agent contacted Mr. Bill
Driscoll, chief criminal investigator, Sheriff’s Office,
Washoe County, Reno, Nevada. After being briefed on the
circumstances of this case, Mr. Driscoll was supplied with
photographs, fingerprints and warrants for Hickock and
Smith. Stops were placed in the files on both these
individuals as well as the automobile. At 10:30 A.M. the
reporting agent contacted Sgt. Abe Feroah, Detective
Division, Police Department, Reno, Nevada. Sgt. Feroah
and the reporting agent checked the police files. Neither
the name of Smith or Hickock was reflected in the felon
registration file. A check of the pawnshop-ticket files failed
to reflect any information about the missing radio. A
permanent stop was placed in these files in the event the
radio is pawned in Reno. The detective handling the
pawnshop detail took photographs of Smith and Hickock to
each of the pawnshops in town and also made a personal
check of each shop for the radio. These pawnshops made
an identification of Smith as being familiar, but were unable
to furnish any further information.”
Thus the morning. That afternoon Nye set forth in search of
Tex John Smith. But at his first stop, the post office, a clerk
at the General Delivery window told him he need look no
farther—not in Nevada—for “the individual” had left there
the previous August and now lived in the vicinity of Circle
City, Alaska. That, anyway, was where his mail was being
forwarded.
“Gosh! Now, there’s a tall order,” said the clerk in response
to Nye’s request for a description of the elder Smith. “The
guy’s out of a book. He calls himself the Lone Wolf. A lot of
his mail comes addressed that way—the Lone Wolf. He
doesn’t receive many letters, no, but bales of catalogues
and advertising pamphlets. You’d be surprised the number
of people send away for that stuff—just to get some mail,
must be. How old? I’d say sixty. Dresses Western—cowboy
boots and a big ten-gallon hat. He told me he used to be
with the rodeo. I’ve talked to him quite a bit. He’s been in
here almost every day the last few years. Once in a while
he’d disappear, stay away a month or so—always claimed
he’d been off prospecting. One day last August a young
man came here to the window. He said he was looking for
his father, Tex John Smith, and did Iknow where he could
find him. He didn’t look much like his dad; the Wolf is so
thin-lipped and Irish, and this boy looked almost pure Indian
—hair black as boot polish, with eyes to match. But next
morning in walks the Wolf and confirms it; he told me his
son had just got out of the Army and that they were going to
Alaska. He’s an old Alaska hand. Ithink he once owned a
hotel there, or some kind of hunting lodge. He said he
expected to be gone about two years. Nope, never seen
him since, him or his boy.”
The Johnson family were recent arrivals in their San
Francisco community—a middle-class, middle-income
real-estate development high in the hills north of the city. On
the afternoon of December 18, 1959, young Mrs. Johnson
was expecting guests; three women of the neighborhood
were coming by for coffee and cake and perhaps a game
of cards. The hostess was tense; it would be the first time
she had entertained in her new home. Now, while she was
listening for the doorbell, she made a final tour, pausing to
dispose of a speck of lint or alter an arrangement of
Christmas poinsettias. The house, like the others on the
slanting hillside street, was a conventional suburban ranch
house, pleasant and commonplace. Mrs. Johnson loved it;
she was in love with the redwood paneling, the wall-to-wall
carpeting, the picture windows fore and aft, the view that
the rear window provided—hills, a valley, then sky and
ocean. And she was proud of the small back garden; her
husband—by profession an insurance salesman, by
inclination a carpenter—had built around it a white picket
fence, and inside it a house for the family dog, and a
sandbox and swings for the children. At the moment, all four
—dog, two little boys, and a girl—were playing there under
a mild sky; she hoped they would be happy in the garden
until the guests had gone. When the doorbell sounded and
Mrs. Johnson went to the door, she was wearing what she
considered her most becoming dress, a yellow knit that
hugged her figure and heightened the pale-tea shine of her
Cherokee coloring and the blackness of her feather-
bobbed hair. She opened the door, prepared to admit
three neighbors; instead, she discovered two strangers—
men who tipped their hats and flipped open badge-studded
billfolds. “Mrs. Johnson?” one of them said. “My name is
Nye. This is Inspector Guthrie. We’re attached to the San
Francisco police, and we’ve just received an inquiry from
Kansas concerning your brother, Perry Edward Smith. It
seems he hasn’t been reporting to his parole officer, and
we wondered if you could tell us anything of his present
whereabouts.”
Mrs. Johnson was not distressed—and definitely not
surprised—to learn that the police were once more
interested in her brother’s activities. What did upset her
was the prospect of having guests arrive to find her being
questioned by detectives. She said, “No. Nothing. Ihaven’t
seen Perry in four years.”
“This is a serious matter, Mrs. Johnson,” Nye said. “We’d
like to talk it over.”
Having surrendered, having asked them in and offered
them coffee (which was accepted), Mrs. Johnson said, “I
haven’t seen Perry in four years. Or heard from him since
he was paroled. Last summer, when he came out of prison,
he visited my father in Reno. In a letter, my father told me he
was returning to Alaska and taking Perry with him. Then he
wrote again, Ithink in September, and he was very angry.
He and Perry had quarreled and separated before they
reached the border. Perry turned back; my father went on to
Alaska alone.”
“And he hasn’t written you since?”
“Then it’s possible your brother may have joined him
recently. Within the last month.”
“Idon’t know. Idon’t care.”
“On bad terms?”
“With Perry? Yes. I’m afraid of him.”
“But while he was in Lansing you wrote him frequently. Or
so the Kansas authorities tell us,” Nye said. The second
man, Inspector Guthrie, seemed content to occupy the
sidelines.
“Iwanted to help him. Ihoped Imight change a few of his
ideas. Now Iknow better. The rights of other people mean
nothing to Perry. He has no respect for anyone.”
“About friends. Do you know of any with whom he might be
staying?”
“Joe James,” she said, and explained that James was a
young Indian logger and fisherman who lived in the forest
near Bellingham, Washington. No, she was not personally
acquainted with him, but she understood that he and his
family were generous people who had often been kind to
Perry in the past. The only friend of Perry’s she had ever
met was a young lady who had appeared on the Johnsons’
doorstep in June, 1955, bringing with her a letter from Perry
in which he introduced her as his wife.
“He said he was in trouble, and asked if Iwould take care
of his wife until he could send for her. The girl looked
twenty; it turned out she was fourteen. And of course she
wasn’t anyone’s wife. But at the time Iwas taken in. Ifelt
sorry for her, and asked her to stay with us. She did, though
not for long. Less than a week. And when she left, she took
our suitcases and everything they could hold—most of my
clothes and most of my husband’s, the silver, even the
kitchen clock.”
“When this happened, where were you living?”
“Denver.”
“Have you ever lived in Fort Scott, Kansas?”
“Never. I’ve never been to Kansas.”
“Have you a sister who lives in Fort Scott?”
“My sister is dead. My only sister.”
Nye smiled. He said, “You understand, Mrs. Johnson, we’re
working on the assumption that your brother will contact
you. Write or call. Or come to see you.”
“Ihope not. As a matter of fact, he doesn’t know we’ve
moved. He thinks I’m still in Denver. Please, if you do find
him, don’t give him my address. I’m afraid.”
“When you say that, is it because you think he might harm
you? Hurt you physically?”
She considered, and unable to decide, said she didn’t
know. “But I’m afraid of him. Ialways have been. He can
seem so warmhearted and sympathetic. Gentle. He cries
so easily. Sometimes music sets him off, and when he was
a little boy he used to cry because he thought a sunset was
beautiful. Or the moon. Oh, he can fool you. He can make
you feel so sorry for him—”
The doorbell rang. Mrs. Johnson’s reluctance to answer
conveyed her dilemma, and Nye (who later wrote of her,
“Throughout the interview she remained composed and
most gracious. A person of exceptional character”)
reached for his brown snapbrim. “Sorry to have troubled
you, Mrs. Johnson. But if you hear from Perry, we hope
you’ll have the good sense to call us. Ask for Inspector
Guthrie.”
After the departure of the detectives, the composure that
had impressed Nye faltered; a familiar despair impended.
She fought it, delayed its full impact until the party was done
and the guests had gone, until she’d fed the children and
bathed them and heard their prayers. Then the mood, like
the evening ocean fog now clouding the street lamps,
closed round her. She had said she was afraid of Perry,
and she was, but was it simply Perry she feared, or was it a
configuration of which he was part—the terrible destinies
that seemed promised the four children of Florence
Buckskin and Tex John Smith? The eldest, the brother she
loved, had shot himself; Fern had fallen out of a window, or
jumped; and Perry was committed to violence, a criminal.
So, in a sense, she was the only survivor; and what
tormented her was the thought that in time she, too, would
be overwhelmed: go mad, or contract an incurable illness,
or in a fire lose all she valued—home, husband, children.
Her husband was away on a business trip, and when she
was alone, she never thought of having a drink. But tonight
she fixed a strong one, then lay down on the living-room
couch, a picture album propped against her knees.
A photograph of her father dominated the first page—a
studio portrait taken in 1922, the year of his marriage to the
young Indian rodeo rider Miss Florence Buckskin. It was a
photograph that invariably transfixed Mrs. Johnson.
Because of it, she could understand why, when essentially
they were so mismatched, her mother had married her
father. The young man in the picture exuded virile allure.
Everything—the cocky tilt of his ginger-haired head, the
squint in his left eye (as though he were sighting a target),
the tiny cowboy scarf knotted round his throat—was
abundantly attractive. On the whole, Mrs. Johnson’s attitude
toward her father was ambivalent, but one aspect of him
she had always respected—his fortitude. She well knew
how eccentric he seemed to others; he seemed so to her,
for that matter. All the same, he was “a real man.” He did
things, did them easily. He could make a tree fall precisely
where he wished. He could skin a bear, repair a watch,
build a house, bake a cake, darn a sock, or catch a trout
with a bent pin and a piece of string. Once he had survived
a winter alone in the Alaskan wilderness.
Alone: in Mrs. Johnson’s opinion, that was how such men
should live. Wives, children, a timid life are not for them.
She turned over some pages of childhood snapshots—
pictures made in Utah and Nevada and Idaho and Oregon.
The rodeo careers of “Tex & Flo” were finished, and the
family, living in an old truck, roamed the country hunting
work, a hard thing to find in 1933. “Tex John Smith Family
picking berries in Oregon, 1933” was the caption under a
snapshot of four barefooted children wearing overalls and
cranky, uniformly fatigued expressions. Berries or stale
bread soaked in sweet condensed milk was often all they
had to eat. Barbara Johnson remembered that once the
family had lived for days on rotten bananas, and that, as a
result, Perry had got colic; he had screamed all night, while
Bobo, as Barbara was called, wept for fear he was dying.
Bobo was three years older than Perry, and she adored
him; he was her only toy, a doll she scrubbed and combed
and kissed and sometimes spanked. Here was a picture of
the two together bathing naked in a diamond-watered
Colorado creek, the brother, a pot-bellied, sun-blackened
cupid, clutching his sister’s hand and giggling, as though
the tumbling stream contained ghostly tickling fingers. In
another snapshot (Mrs. Johnson was unsure, but she
thought probably it was taken at a remote Nevada ranch
where the family was staying when a final battle between
the parents, a terrifying contest in which horsewhips and
scalding water and kerosene lamps were used as
weapons, had brought the marriage to a stop), she and
Perry are astride a pony, their heads are together, their
cheeks touch; beyond them dry mountains burn.
Later, when the children and their mother had gone to live in
San Francisco, Bobo’s love for the little boy weakened until
it went quite away. He wasn’t her baby any more but a wild
thing, a thief, a robber. His first recorded arrest was on
October 27, 1936—his eighth birthday. Ultimately, after
several confinements in institutions and children’s detention
centers, he was returned to the custody of his father, and it
was many years before Bobo saw him again, except in
photographs that Tex John occasionally sent his other
children—pictures that, pasted above white-ink captions,
were part of the album’s contents. There was “Perry, Dad,
and their Husky Dog,” “Perry and Dad Panning for Gold,”
“Perry Bear-Hunting in Alaska.” In this last, he was a fur-
capped boy of fifteen standing on snowshoes among snow-
weighted trees, a rifle hooked under his arm; the face was
drawn and the eyes were sad and very tired, and Mrs.
Johnson, looking at the picture, was reminded of a “scene”
that Perry had made once when he had visited her in
Denver. Indeed, it was the last time she had ever seen him
—the spring of 1955. They were discussing his childhood
with Tex John, and suddenly Perry, who had too much drink
inside him, pushed her against a wall and held her there. “I
was his nigger,” Perry said. “That’s all. Somebody he could
work their guts out and never have to pay them one hot
dime. No, Bobo, I’m talking. Shut up, or I’ll throw you in the
river. Like once when Iwas walking across a bridge in
Japan, and a guy was standing there, Inever saw him
before, Ijust picked him up and threw him in the river.
“Please, Bobo. Please listen. You think Ilike myself? Oh,
the man Icould have been! But that bastard never gave me
a chance. He wouldn’t let me go to school. O.K. O.K. Iwas
a bad kid. But the time came Ibegged to go to school. I
happen to have a brilliant mind. In case you don’t know. A
brilliant mind and talent plus. But no education, because he
didn’t want me to learn anything, only how to tote and carry
for him. Dumb. Ignorant. That’s the way he wanted me to
be. So that Icould never escape him. But you, Bobo. You
went to school. You and Jimmy and Fern. Every damn one
of you got an education. Everybody but me. And Ihate you,
all of you—Dad and everybody.”
As though for his brother and sisters life had been a bed of
roses! Maybe so, if that meant cleaning up Mama’s
drunken vomit, if it meant never anything nice to wear or
enough to eat. Still, it was true, all three had finished high
school. Jimmy, in fact, had graduated at the top of his class
—an honor he owed entirely to his own will power. That,
Barbara Johnson felt, was what made his suicide so
ominous. Strong character, high courage, hard work—it
seemed that none of these were determining factors in the
fates of Tex John’s children. They shared a doom against
which virtue was no defense. Not that Perry was virtuous, or
Fern. When Fern was fourteen, she changed her name, and
for the rest of her short life she tried to justify the
replacement: Joy. She was an easygoing girl, “everybody’s
sweetheart”—rather too much everybody’s, for she was
partial to men, though somehow she hadn’t much luck with
them. Somehow, the kind of man she liked always let her
down. Her mother had died in an alcoholic coma, and she
was afraid of drink—yet she drank. Before she was twenty,
Fern-Joy was beginning the day with a bottle of beer. Then,
one summer night, she fell from the window of a hotel room.
Falling, she struck a theater marquee, bounced off it, and
rolled under the wheels of a taxi. Above, in the vacated
room, police found her shoes, a moneyless purse, an
empty whiskey bottle.
One could understand Fern and forgive her, but Jimmy was
a different matter. Mrs. Johnson was looking at a picture of
him in which he was dressed as a sailor; during the war he
had served in the Navy. Slender, a pale young seafarer with
an elongated face of slightly dour saintliness, he stood with
an arm around the waist of the girl he had married and, in
Mrs. Johnson’s estimation, ought not to have, for they had
nothing in common—the serious Jimmy and this teen-age
San Diego fleet-follower whose glass beads reflected a
now long-faded sun. And yet what Jimmy had felt for her
was beyond normal love; it was passion—a passion that
was in part pathological. As for the girl, she must have
loved him, and loved him completely, or she would not have
done as she did. If only Jimmy had believed that! Or been
capable of believing it. But jealousy imprisoned him. He
was mortified by thoughts of the men she had slept with
before their marriage; he was convinced, moreover, that
she remained promiscuous—that every time he went to
sea, or even left her alone for the day, she betrayed him
with a multitude of lovers, whose existence he unendingly
demanded that she admit. Then she aimed a shotgun at a
point between her eyes and pressed the trigger with her
toe. When Jimmy found her, he didn’t call the police. He
picked her up and put her on the bed and lay down beside
her. Sometime around dawn of the next day, he reloaded
the gun and killed himself.
Opposite the picture of Jimmy and his wife was a
photograph of Perry in uniform. It had been clipped from a
newspaper, and was accompanied by a paragraph of text:
“Headquarters, United States Army, Alaska. Pvt. Perry E.
Smith, 23, first Army Korean combat veteran to return to the
Anchorage, Alaska, area, is greeted by Captain Mason,
Public Information Officer, upon arrival at Elmendorf Air
Force Base. Smith served 15 months with the 24th Division
as a combat engineer. His trip from Seattle to Anchorage
was a gift from Pacific Northern Airlines. Miss Lynn
Marquis, airline hostess, smiles approval at welcome.
(Official U.S. Army Photo).” Captain Mason, with hand
extended, is looking at Private Smith, but Private Smith is
looking at the camera. In his expression Mrs. Johnson saw,
or imagined she saw, not gratitude but arrogance, and, in
place of pride, immense conceit. It wasn’t incredible that he
had met a man on a bridge and thrown him off it. Of course
he had. She had never doubted it.
She shut the album and switched on the television, but it did
not console her. Suppose he did come? The detectives
had found her; why shouldn’t Perry? He need not expect her
to help him; she wouldn’t even let him in. The front door was
locked, but not the door to the garden. The garden was
white with sea-fog; it might have been an assembly of
spirits: Mama and Jimmy and Fern. When Mrs. Johnson
bolted the door, she had in mind the dead as well as the
living.
Acloudburst. Rain. Buckets of it. Dick ran. Perry ran too,
but he could not run as fast; his legs were shorter, and he
was lugging the suitcase. Dick reached shelter—a barn
near the highway—long before him. On leaving Omaha,
after a night spent in a Salvation Army dormitory, a truck
driver had given them a ride across the Nebraska border
into Iowa. The past several hours, however, had found them
afoot. The rain came when they were sixteen miles north of
an Iowa settlement called Tenville Junction.
The barn was dark.
“Dick?” Perry said.
“Over here,” Dick said. He was sprawled on a bed of hay.
Perry, drenched and shaking, dropped beside him. “I’m so
cold,” he said, burrowing in the hay, “I’m so cold Iwouldn’t
give a damn if this caught fire and burned me alive.” He
was hungry, too. Starved. Last night they had dined on
bowls of Salvation Army soup, and today the only
nourishment they’d had was some chocolate bars and
chewing gum that Dick had stolen from a drugstore candy
counter. “Any more Hershey?” Perry asked.
No, but there was still a pack of chewing gum. They divided
it, then settled down to chewing it, each chomping on two
and a half sticks of Doublemint, Dick’s favorite flavor (Perry
preferred Juicy Fruit). Money was the problem. Their utter
lack of it had led Dick to decide that their next move should
be what Perry considered “a crazy-man stunt”—a return to
Kansas City. When Dick had first urged the return, Perry
said, “You ought to see a doctor.” Now, huddled together in
the cold darkness, listening to the dark, cold rain, they
resumed the argument, Perry once more listing the dangers
of such a move, for surely by this time Dick was wanted for
parole violation—“if nothing more.” But Dick was not to be
dissuaded. Kansas City, he again insisted, was the one
place he was certain he could successfully “hang a lot of hot
paper. Hell, Iknow we’ve got to be careful. Iknow they’ve
got a warrant out. Because of the paper we hung before.
But we’ll move fast. One day—that’ll do it. If we grab
enough, maybe we ought to try Florida. Spend Christmas in
Miami—stay the winter if it looks good.” But Perry chewed
his gum and shivered and sulked. Dick said, “What is it,
honey? That other deal? Why the hell can’t you forget it?
They never made any connection. They never will.”
Perry said, “You could be wrong. And if you are, it means
The Corner.” Neither one had ever before referred to the
ultimate penalty in the State of Kansas—the gallows, or
death in The Corner, as the inmates of Kansas State
Penitentiary have named the shed that houses the
equipment required to hang a man.
Dick said, “The comedian. You kill me.” He struck a match,
intending to smoke a cigarette, but something seen by the
light of the flaring match brought him to his feet and carried
him across the barn to a cow stall. A car was parked inside
the stall, a black-and-white two-door 1956 Chevrolet. The
key was in the ignition.
Dewey was determined to conceal from “the civilian
population” any knowledge of a major break in the Clutter
case—so determined that he decided to take into his
confidence Garden City’s two professional town criers: Bill
Brown, editor of the Garden City Telegram, and Robert
Wells, manager of the local radio station, KIUL. In outlining
the situation, Dewey emphasized his reasons for
considering secrecy of the first importance: “Remember,
there’s a possibility these men are innocent.”
It was a possibility too valid to dismiss. The informer, Floyd
Wells, might easily have invented his story; such tale-telling
was not infrequently undertaken by prisoners who hoped to
win favor or attract official notice. But even if the man’s
every word was gospel, Dewey and his colleagues had not
yet unearthed one bit of solid supporting evidence
—“courtroom evidence.” What had they discovered that
could not be interpreted as plausible, though exceptional,
coincidence? Just because Smith had traveled to Kansas
to visit his friend Hickock, and just because Hickock
possessed a gun of the caliber used to commit the crime,
and just because the suspects had arranged a false alibi to
account for their whereabouts the night of November 14,
they were not necessarily mass murderers. “But we’re
pretty sure this is it. We all think so. If we didn’t, we wouldn’t
have set up a seventeen-state alarm, from Arkansas to
Oregon. But keep in mind: It could be years before we
catch them. They may have separated. Or left the country.
There’s a chance they’ve gone to Alaska—not hard to get
lost in Alaska. The longer they’re free, the less of a case
we’ll have. Frankly, as matters stand, we don’t have much
of a case anyhow. We could nab those sonsabitches
tomorrow, and never be able to prove spit.”
Dewey did not exaggerate. Except for two sets of boot
prints, one bearing a diamond pattern and the other a Cat’s
Paw design, the slayers had left not a single clue. Since
they seemed to take such care, they had undoubtedly got
rid of the boots long ago. And the radio, too—assuming
that it was they who had stolen it, which was something
Dewey still hesitated to do, for it appeared to him
“ludicrously inconsistent” with the magnitude of the crime
and the manifest cunning of the criminals, and
“inconceivable” that these men had entered a house
expecting to find a money-filled safe, and then, not finding
it, had thought it expedient to slaughter the family for
perhaps a few dollars and a small portable radio. “Without
a confession, we’ll never get a conviction,” he said. “That’s
my opinion. And that’s why we can’t be too cautious. They
think they’ve got away with it. Well, we don’t want them to
know any different. The safer they feel, the sooner we’ll
grab them.”
But secrets are an unusual commodity in a town the size of
Garden City. Anyone visiting the sheriff’s office, three
underfurnished, overcrowded rooms on the third floor of the
county courthouse, could detect an odd, almost sinister
atmosphere. The hurry-scurry, the angry hum of recent
weeks had departed; a quivering stillness now permeated
the premises. Mrs. Richardson, the office secretary and a
very down-to-earth person, had acquired overnight a dainty
lot of whispery, tiptoe mannerisms, and the men she
served, the sheriff and his staff, Dewey and the imported
team of K.B.I. agents, crept about conversing in hushed
tones. It was as though, like huntsmen hiding in a forest,
they were afraid that any abrupt sound or movement would
warn away approaching beasts.
People talked. The Trail Room of the Warren Hotel, a
coffee shop that Garden City businessmen treat as though
it were a private club, was a murmuring cave of speculation
and rumor. An eminent citizen, so one heard, was on the
point of arrest. Or it was now known that the crime was the
work of killers hired by enemies of the Kansas Wheat
Growers’ Association, a progressive organization in which
Mr. Clutter had played a large role. Of the many stories
circulating, the most nearly accurate was contributed by a
prominent car dealer (who refused to disclose its source):
“Seems there was a man who worked for Herb way back
yonder around ’47 or ’48. Ordinary ranch hand. Seems he
went to prison, state prison, and while he was there he got
to thinking what a rich man Herb was. So about a month
ago, when they let him loose, the first thing he did was
come on out here to rob and kill those people.”
But seven miles westward, in the village of Holcomb, not a
hint was heard of impending sensations, one reason being
that for some while the Clutter tragedy had been a banned
topic at both of the community’s principal gossip-
dispensaries—the post office and Hartman’s Café. “Myself,
Idon’t want to hear another word,” said Mrs. Hartman. “Itold
them, We can’t go on like this. Distrusting everybody,
scaring each other to death. What Isay is, if you want to talk
about it, stay out of my place.” Myrt Clare took quite as
strong a stand. “Folks come in here to buy a nickel’s worth
of postage and think they can spend the next three hours
and thirty-three minutes turning the Clutters inside out.
Pickin’ the wings off other people. Rattlesnakes, that’s all
they are. Idon’t have the time to listen. I’m in business—I’m
a representative of the government of the United States.
Anyway, it’s morbid. Al Dewey and those hot-shot cops
from Topeka and Kansas City—supposed to be sharp as
turpentine. But Idon’t know a soul who still thinks they’ve
got hell’s chance of catching the one done it. So Isay the
sane thing to do is shut up. You live until you die, and it
doesn’t matter howyou go; dead’s dead. So why carry on
like a sackful of sick cats just because Herb Clutter got his
throat cut? Anyway, it’s morbid. Polly Stringer, from over at
the schoolhouse? Polly Stringer was in here this morning.
She said it’s only now, after over a month, only now those
kids are beginning to quiet down. Which made me think:
What if they do arrest somebody? If they do, it’s bound to
be somebody everybody knows. And that would fan the fire
for sure, get the pot boiling just when it had started to cool
off. Ask me, we’ve had enough excitement.”
It was early, not yet nine, and Perry was the first customer
at the Washateria, a self-service laundry. He opened his fat
straw suitcase, extracted a wad of briefs and socks and
shirts (some his, some Dick’s), tossed them into a washer,
and fed the machine a lead slug—one of many bought in
Mexico.
Perry was well acquainted with the workings of such
emporiums, having often patronized them, and happily,
since usually he found it “so relaxing” to sit quietly and
watch clothes get clean. Not today. He was too
apprehensive. Despite his warnings, Dick had won out.
Here they were, back in Kansas City—dead broke, to boot,
and driving a stolen car! All night they had raced the Iowa
Chevrolet through thick rain, stopping twice to siphon gas,
both times from vehicles parked on the empty streets of
small sleeping towns. (This was Perry’s job, one at which
he judged himself “absolutely tops. Just a short piece of
rubber hose, that’s my cross-country credit card.”) On
reaching Kansas City at sunrise, the travelers had gone
first to the airport, where in the men’s lavatory they washed
and shaved and brushed their teeth; two hours later, after a
nap in the airport lounge, they returned to the city. It was
then that Dick had dropped his partner at the Washateria,
promising to come back for him within the hour.
When the laundry was clean and dry, Perry repacked the
suitcase. It was past ten. Dick, supposedly off somewhere
“hanging paper,” was overdue. He sat down to wait,
choosing a bench on which, an arm’s length away, a
woman’s purse rested—tempting him to snake his hand
around inside it. But the appearance of its owner, the
burliest of several women now employing the
establishment’s facilities, deterred him. Once, when he was
a running-wild child in San Francisco, he and a “Chink kid”
(Tommy Chan? Tommy Lee? ) had worked together as a
“purse-snatching team.” It amused Perry—cheered him up
—to remember some of their escapades. “Like one time
we sneaked up on an old lady, really old, and Tommy
grabbed her handbag, but she wouldn’t let go, she was a
regular tiger. The harder he tugged one way, the harder she
tugged the other. Then she saw me, and said, ‘Help me!
Help me!’ and Isaid, ‘Hell, lady, I’m helping him!—and
bopped her good. Put her on the pavement. Ninety cents
was all we got—Iremember exactly. We went to a Chink
restaurant and ate ourselves under the table.”
Things hadn’t changed much. Perry was twenty-odd years
older and a hundred pounds heavier, and yet his material
situation had improved not at all. He was still (and wasn’t it
incredible, a person of his intelligence, his talents?) an
urchin dependent, so to say, on stolen coins.
A clock on the wall kept catching his eye. At half past ten he
began to worry; by eleven his legs were pulsing with pain,
which was always, with him, a sign of approaching panic
—“bubbles in my blood.” He ate an aspirin, and tried to blot
out—blur, at least—the brilliantly vivid cavalcade gliding
across his mind, a procession of dire visions: Dick in the
hands of the law, perhaps arrested while writing a phony
check, or for committing a minor traffic violation (and found
to be driving a “hot” car). Very likely, at this very instant Dick
sat trapped inside a circle of red-necked detectives. And
they weren’t discussing trivialities—bad checks or stolen
automobiles. Murder, that was the topic, for somehow the
connection that Dick had been so certain no one could
make had been made. And right nowa carload of Kansas
City police were on their way to the Washateria.
But, no, he was imagining too much. Dick would never do
that—“spill his guts.” Think of how often he had heard him
say, “They can beat me blind, I’ll never tell them anything.”
Of course, Dick was a “blowhard”; his toughness, as Perry
had come to know, existed solely in situations where he
unarguably had the upper hand. Suddenly, gratefully, he
thought of a less desperate reason for Dick’s prolonged
absence. He’d gone to visit his parents. A risky thing to do,
but Dick was “devoted” to them, or claimed to be, and last
night during the long rainy ride he had told Perry, “I’d sure
like to see my folks. They wouldn’t mention it. Imean, they
wouldn’t tell the parole officer—do anything to get us into
trouble. Only I’m ashamed to. I’m afraid of what my mother
would say. About the checks. And going off like we did. But
Iwish Icould call them, hear how they are.” However, that
was not possible, for the Hickock home was without a
telephone; otherwise, Perry would have rung up to see if
Dick was there.
Another few minutes, and he was again convinced that
Dick was under arrest. His leg pains flared up, flashed
through his body, and the laundry odors, the steamy stench,
all at once sickened him, picked him up and propelled him
out the door. He stood at the curb retching like “a drunk with
the dry heaves.” Kansas City! Hadn’t he known Kansas City
was bad luck, and begged Dick to keep away? Now,
maybe now, Dick was sorry he hadn’t listened. And he
wondered: But what about me, “with a dime or two and a
bunch of lead slugs in my pocket”? Where could he go?
Who would help him? Bobo? Fat chance! But her husband
might. If Fred Johnson had followed his own inclination, he
would have guaranteed employment for Perry after he left
prison, thus helping him obtain a parole. But Bobo wouldn’t
permit it; she had said it would only lead to trouble, and
possibly danger. Then she had written to Perry to tell him
precisely that. One fine day he’d pay her back, have a little
fun—talk to her, advertise his abilities, spell out in detail the
things he was capable of doing to people like her,
respectable people, safe and smug people, exactly like
Bobo. Yes, let her know just how dangerous he could be,
and watch her eyes. Surely that was worth a trip to Denver?
Which was what he’d do—go to Denver and visit the
Johnsons. Fred Johnson would stake him to a new start in
life; he’d have to, if he wanted ever to be rid of him.
Then Dick came up to him at the curb. “Hey, Perry,” he
said. “You sick?”
The sound of Dick’s voice was like an injection of some
potent narcotic, a drug that, invading his veins, produced a
delirium of colliding sensations: tension and relief, fury and
affection. He advanced toward Dick with clenched fists.
“You sonofabitch,” he said.
Dick grinned, and said, “Come on. We’re eating again.”
But explanations were in order—apologies, too—and over
a bowl of chili at the Kansas City hash house that Dick liked
best, the Eagle Buffet, Dick supplied them. “I’m sorry,
honey. Iknew you’d get the bends. Think I’d tangled with a
bull. But Iwas having such a run of luck it seemed like I
ought to let it ride.” He explained that after leaving Perry he
had gone to the Markl Buick Company, the firm that had
once employed him, hoping to find a set of license plates to
substitute for the hazardous Iowa plates on the abducted
Chevrolet. “Nobody saw me come or go. Marki used to do
a considerable wrecked-car trade. Sure enough, out back
there was a smashed-up De Soto with Kansas tags.” And
where were they now? “On our buggy, pal.”
Having made the switch, Dick had dropped the Iowa plates
in a municipal reservoir. Then he’d stopped at a filling
station where a friend worked, a former high-school
classmate named Steve, and persuaded Steve to cash a
check for fifty dollars, which was something he’d not done
before—“rob a buddy.” Well, he’d never see Steve again.
He was “cutting out” of Kansas City tonight, this time really
forever. So why not fleece a few old friends? With that in
mind, he’d called on another ex-classmate, a drugstore
clerk. The take was thereby increased to seventy-five
dollars. “Now, this afternoon, we’ll roll that up to a couple
hundred. I’ve made a list of places to hit. Six or seven,
starting right here,” he said, meaning the Eagle Buffet,
where everybody—the bartender and waiters—knew and
liked him, and called him Pickles (in honor of his favorite
food). “Then Florida, here we come. How about it, honey?
Didn’t Ipromise you we’d spend Christmas in Miami? Just
like all the millionaires?”
Dewey and his colleague K.B.I. Agent Clarence stood
waiting for a free table in the Trail Room. Looking around at
the customary exhibit of lunch-hour faces—soft-fleshed
businessmen and ranchers with sun-branded, coarse
complexions—Dewey acknowledged particular
acquaintances: the county coroner, Dr. Fenton; the
manager of the Warren, Tom Mahar; Harrison Smith, who
had run for county attorney last year and lost the election to
Duane West; and also Herbert W. Clutter, the owner of
River Valley Farm and a member of Dewey’s Sunday
School class. Wait a minute! Wasn’t Herb Clutter dead?
And hadn’t Dewey attended his funeral? Yet there he was,
sitting in the Trail Room’s circular corner booth, his lively
brown eyes, his square-jawed, genial good looks
unchanged by death. But Herb was not alone. Sharing the
table were two young men, and Dewey, recognizing them,
nudged Agent Duntz.
“Look.”
“Where?”
“The corner.”
“I’ll be damned.”
Hickock and Smith! But the moment of recognition was
mutual. Those boys smelled danger. Feet first, they
crashed through the Trail Room’s plate-glass window, and
with Duntz and Dewey leaping after them, sped along Main
Street, past Palmer Jewelry, Norris Drugs, the Garden
Café, then around the corner and down to the depot and in
and out, hide-and-seek, among a congregation of white
grain-storage towers. Dewey drew a pistol, and so did
Duntz, but as they took aim, the supernatural intervened.
Abruptly, mysteriously (it was like a dream!), everyone was
swimming—the pursued, the pursuers—stroking the
awesome width of water that the Garden City Chamber of
Commerce claims is the “World’s Largest FREE
Swimpool.” As the detectives drew abreast of their quarry,
why, once more (How did it happen? Could he be
dreaming?) the scene faded out, and faded in upon another
landscape: Valley View Cemetery, that gray-and-green
island of tombs and trees and flowered paths, a restful,
leafy, whispering oasis lying like a cool piece of cloud
shade on the luminous wheat plains north of town. But now
Duntz had disappeared, and Dewey was alone with the
hunted men. Though he could not see them, he was certain
they were hiding among the dead, crouching there behind a
headstone, perhaps the headstone of his own father: “Alvin
Adams Dewey, September 6, 1879—January 26, 1948.”
Gun drawn, he crept along the solemn lanes until, hearing
laughter and tracing its sound, he saw that Hickock and
Smith were not hiding at all but standing astride the as yet
unmarked mass grave of Herb and Bonnie and Nancy and
Kenyon, standing legs apart, hands on hips, heads flung
back, laughing. Dewey fired . . . and again . . . and
again . . . Neither man fell, though each had been shot
through the heart three times; they simply rather slowly
turned transparent, by degrees grew invisible, evaporated,
though the loud laughter expanded until Dewey bowed
before it, ran from it, filled with a despair so mournfully
intense that it awakened him.
When he awoke, it was as though he were a feverish,
frightened ten-year-old; his hair was wet, his shirt cold-
damp and clinging. The room—a room in the sheriff’s
office, into which he’d locked himself before falling asleep
at a desk—was dull with near-darkness. Listening, he could
hear Mrs. Richardson’s telephone ringing in the adjacent
office. But she was not there to answer it; the office was
closed. On his way out he walked past the ringing phone
with determined indifference, and then hesitated. It might
be Marie, calling to ask if he was still working and should
she wait dinner.
“Mr. A. A. Dewey, please. Kansas City calling.”
“This is Mr. Dewey.”
“Go ahead, Kansas City. Your party is on the line.”
“Al? Brother Nye.”
“Yes, Brother.”
“Get ready for some very big news.”
“I’m ready.”
“Our friends are here. Right here in Kansas City.”
“How do you know?”
“Well, they aren’t exactly keeping it a secret. Hickock’s
written checks from one side of town to the other. Using his
own name.”
“His own name. That must mean he doesn’t plan to hang
around long—either that or he’s feeling awful damn sure of
himself. So Smith’s still with him?”
“Oh, they’re together O.K. But driving a different car. A
1956 Chevy—black-and-white two-door job.”
“Kansas tags?”
“Kansas tags. And listen, Al—are we lucky! They bought a
television set, see? Hickock gave the salesman a check.
Just as they were driving off, the guy had the sense to write
down the license number. Jot it on the back of the check.
Johnson County License 16212.”
“Checked the registration?”
“Guess what?”
“It’s a stolen car.”
“Undoubtedly. But the tags were definitely lifted. Our friends
took them off a wrecked De Soto in a K.C. garage.”
“Know when?”
“Yesterday morning. The boss [Logan Sanford] sent out an
alert with the new license number and a description of the
car.”
“How about the Hickock farm? If they’re still in the area, it
seems to me sooner or later they’ll go there.”
“Don’t worry. We’re watching it. Al—”
“I’m here.”
“That’s what Iwant for Christmas. All Iwant. To wrap this up.
Wrap it up and sleep till New Year’s. Wouldn’t that be one
hell of a present?”
“Well, Ihope you get it.”
“Well, Ihope we both do.”
Afterward, as he crossed the darkening courthouse square,
pensively scuffing through dry mounds of unraked leaves,
Dewey wondered at his lack of elation. Why, when he now
knew that the suspects were not forever lost in Alaska or
Mexico or Timbuctoo, when the next second an arrest might
be made—why was it he felt none of the excitement he
ought to feel? The dream was at fault, for the treadmill
mood of it had lingered, making him question Nye’s
assertions—in a sense, disbelieve them. He did not
believe that Hickock and Smith would be caught in Kansas
City. They were invulnerable.
In Miami Beach, 335 Ocean Drive is the address of the
Somerset Hotel, a small, square building painted more or
less white, with many lavender touches, among them a
lavender sign that reads, “VACANCY—LOWEST RATES—BEACH
FACILITIES—ALWAYS A SEABREEZE.” It is one of a row of little
stucco-and-cement hotels lining a white, melancholy street.
In December, 1959, the Somerset’s “beach facilities”
consisted of two beach umbrellas stuck in a strip of sand at
the rear of the hotel. One umbrella, pink, had written upon it,
“We Serve Valentine Ice-Cream.” At noon on Christmas
Day, a quartet of women lay under and around it, a
transistor radio serenading them. The second umbrella,
blue and bearing the command “Tan with Coppertone,”
sheltered Dick and Perry, who for five days had been living
at the Somerset, in a double room renting for eighteen
dollars weekly.
Perry said, “You never wished me a Merry Christmas.”
“Merry Christmas, honey. And a Happy New Year.”
Dick wore bathing trunks, but Perry, as in Acapulco,
refused to expose his injured legs—he feared the sight
might “offend” other beach-goers—and therefore sat fully
clothed, wearing even socks and shoes. Still, he was
comparatively content, and when Dick stood up and started
performing exercises—headstands, meant to impress the
ladies beneath the pink umbrella—he occupied himself with
the Miami Herald. Presently he came across an inner-page
story that won his entire attention. It concerned murder, the
slaying of a Florida family, a Mr. and Mrs. Clifford Walker,
their four-year-old son, and their two-year-old daughter.
Each of the victims, though not bound or gagged, had been
shot through the head with a .22 weapon. The crime,
clueless and apparently motiveless, had taken place
Saturday night, December 19, at the Walker home, on a
cattle-raising ranch not far from Tallahassee.
Perry interrupted Dick’s athletics to read the story aloud,
and said, “Where were we last Saturday night?”
“Tallahassee?”
“I’m asking you.”
Dick concentrated. On Thursday night, taking turns at the
wheel, they had driven out of Kansas and through Missouri
into Arkansas and over the Ozarks, “up” to Louisiana,
where a burned-out generator stopped them early Friday
morning. (A secondhand replacement, bought in
Shreveport, cost twenty-two fifty.) That night they’d slept
parked by the side of the road somewhere near the
Alabama-Florida border. The next day’s journey, an
unhurried affair, had included several touristic diversions—
visits to an alligator farm and a rattlesnake ranch, a ride in
a glass-bottomed boat over a silvery-clear swamp lake, a
late and long and costly broiled-lobster lunch at a roadside
seafood restaurant. Delightful day! But both were
exhausted when they arrived at Tallahassee, and decided
to spend the night there. “Yes, Tallahassee,” Dick said.
“Amazing!” Perry glanced through the article again. “Know
what Iwouldn’t be surprised? If this wasn’t done by a
lunatic. Some nut that read about what happened out in
Kansas.”
Dick, because he didn’t care to hear Perry “get going on
that subject,” shrugged and grinned and trotted down to the
ocean’s edge, where he ambled awhile over the surf-
drenched sand, here and there stooping to collect a
seashell. As a boy he’d so envied the son of a neighbor
who had gone to the Gulf Coast on holiday and returned
with a box full of shells—so hated him—that he’d stolen the
shells and one by one crushed them with a hammer. Envy
was constantly with him; the Enemy was anyone who was
someone he wanted to be or who had anything he wanted
to have.
For instance, the man he had seen by the pool at the
Fontainebleau. Miles away, shrouded in a summery veil of
heat-haze and sea-sparkle, he could see the towers of the
pale, expensive hotels—the Fontainebleau, the Eden Roc,
the Roney Plaza. On their second day in Miami he had
suggested to Perry that they invade these pleasure-domes.
“Maybe pick up a coupla rich women,” he had said. Perry
had been most reluctant; he felt people would stare at them
because of their khaki trousers and T-shirts. Actually, their
tour of the Fontainebleau’s gaudy premises went
unnoticed, amid the men striding about in Bermuda shorts
of candy-striped raw silk, and the women wearing bathing
suits and mink stoles simultaneously. The trespassers had
loitered in the lobby, strolled in the garden, lounged by the
swimming pool. It was there that Dick saw the man, who
was his own age—twenty-eight or thirty. He could have
been a “gambler or lawyer or maybe a gangster from
Chicago.” Whatever he was, he looked as though he knew
the glories of money and power. A blonde who resembled
Marilyn Monroe was kneading him with suntan oil, and his
lazy, beringed hand reached for a tumbler of iced orange
juice. All that belonged to him, Dick, but he would never
have it. Why should that sonofabitch have everything, while
he had nothing? Why should that “big-shot bastard” have all
the luck? With a knife in his hand, he, Dick, had power.
Bigshot bastards like that had better be careful or he might
“open them up and let a little of their luck spill on the floor.”
But Dick’s day was ruined. The beautiful blonde rubbing on
the suntan oil had ruined it. He’d said to Perry, “Let’s pull
the hell out of here.”
Now a young girl, probably twelve, was drawing figures in
the sand, carving out big, crude faces with a piece of
driftwood. Dick, pretending to admire her art, offered the
shells he had gathered. “They make good eyes,” he said.
The child accepted the gift, whereupon Dick smiled and
winked at her. He was sorry he felt as he did about her, for
his sexual interest in female children was a failing of which
he was “sincerely ashamed”—a secret he’d not confessed
to anyone and hoped no one suspected (though he was
aware that Perry had reason to), because other people
might not think it “normal.” That, to be sure, was something
he was certain he was—“a normal.” Seducing pubescent
girls, as he had done “eight or nine” times in the last several
years, did not disprove it, for if the truth were known, most
real men had the same desires he had. He took the child’s
hand and said, “You’re my baby girl. My little sweetheart.”
But she objected. Her hand, held by his, twitched like a fish
on a hook, and he recognized the astounded expression in
her eyes from earlier incidents in his career. He let go,
laughed lightly, and said, “Just a game. Don’t you like
games?”
Perry, still reclining under the blue umbrella, had observed
the scene and realized Dick’s purpose at once, and
despised him for it; he had “no respect for people who can’t
control themselves sexually,” especially when the lack of
control involved what he called “pervertiness”—“bothering
kids,” “queer stuff,” rape. And he thought he had made his
views obvious to Dick; indeed, hadn’t they almost had a fist
fight when quite recently he had prevented Dick from raping
a terrified young girl? However, he wouldn’t care to repeat
that particular test of strength. He was relieved when he
saw the child walk away from Dick.
Christmas carols were in the air; they issued from the radio
of the four women and mixed strangely with Miami’s
sunshine and the cries of the querulous, never thoroughly
silent seagulls. “Oh, come let us adore Him, Oh, come let
us adore Him”: a cathedral choir, an exalted music that
moved Perry to tears—which refused to stop, even after the
music did. And as was not uncommon when he was thus
afflicted, he dwelt upon a possibility that had for him
“tremendous fascination”: suicide. As a child he had often
thought of killing himself, but those were sentimental
reveries born of a wish to punish his father and mother and
other enemies. From young manhood onward, however, the
prospect of ending his life had more and more lost its
fantastic quality. That, he must remember, was Jimmy’s
“solution,” and Fern’s, too. And lately it had come to seem
not just an alternative but the specific death awaiting him.
Anyway, he couldn’t see that he had “a lot to live for.” Hot
islands and buried gold, diving deep in fire-blue seas
toward sunken treasure—such dreams were gone. Gone,
too, was “Perry O’Parsons,” the name invented for the
singing sensation of stage and screen that he’d half-
seriously hoped some day to be. Perry O’Parsons had died
without having ever lived. What was there to look forward
to? He and Dick were “running a race without a finish
line”—that was how it struck him. And now, after not quite a
week in Miami, the long ride was to resume. Dick, who had
worked one day at the ABC auto-service company for sixty-
five cents an hour, had told him, “Miami’s worse than
Mexico. Sixty-five cents! Not me. I’m white.” So tomorrow,
with only twenty-seven dollars left of the money raised in
Kansas City, they were heading west again, to Texas, to
Nevada—“nowhere definite.”
Dick, who had waded into the surf, returned. He fell, wet
and breathless, face down on the sticky sand.
“How was the water?”
“Wonderful.”
The closeness of Christmas to Nancy Clutter’s birthday,
which was right after New Year’s, had always created
problems for her boy friend, Bobby Rupp. It had strained his
imagination to think of two suitable gifts in such quick
succession. But each year, with money made working
summers on his father’s sugar-beet farm, he had done the
best he could, and on Christmas morning he had always
hurried to the Clutter house carrying a package that his
sisters had helped him wrap and that he hoped would
surprise Nancy and delight her. Last year he had given her
a small heart-shaped gold locket. This year, as forehanded
as ever, he’d been wavering between the imported
perfumes on sale at Norris Drugs and a pair of riding
boots. But then Nancy had died.
On Christmas morning, instead of racing off to River Valley
Farm, he remained at home, and later in the day he shared
with his family the splendid dinner his mother had been a
week preparing. Everybody—his parents and every one of
his seven brothers and sisters—had treated him gently
since the tragedy. All the same, at mealtimes he was told
again and again that he must please eat. No one
comprehended that really he was ill, that grief had made
him so, that grief had drawn a circle around him he could
not escape from and others could not enter—except
possibly Sue. Until Nancy’s death he had not appreciated
Sue, never felt altogether comfortable with her. She was too
different—took seriously things that even girls ought not to
take very seriously: paintings, poems, the music she played
on the piano. And, of course, he was jealous of her; her
position in Nancy’s esteem, though of another order, had
been at least equal to his. But that was why she was able to
understand his loss. Without Sue, without her almost
constant presence, how could he have withstood such an
avalanche of shocks—the crime itself, his interviews with
Mr. Dewey, the pathetic irony of being for a while the
principal suspect?
Then, after about a month, the friendship waned. Bobby
went less frequently to sit in the Kidwells’ tiny, cozy parlor,
and when he did go, Sue seemed not as welcoming. The
trouble was that they were forcing each other to mourn and
remember what in fact they wanted to forget. Sometimes
Bobby could when he was playing basketball or driving his
car over country roads at eighty miles an hour, or when, as
part of a self-imposed athletic program (his ambition was
to be a high-school gymnastics instructor), he took long-
distance jog-trots across flat yellow fields. And now, after
helping clear the dining table of all its holiday dishes, that
was what he decided to do—put on a sweatshirt and go for
a run.
The weather was remarkable. Even for western Kansas,
renowned for the longevity of its Indian summers, the
current sample seemed far-fetched—dry air, bold sun,
azure sky. Optimistic ranchers were predicting an “open
winter”—a season so bland that cattle could graze during
the whole of it. Such winters are rare, but Bobby could
remember one—the year he had started to court Nancy.
They were both twelve, and after school he used to carry
her book satchel the mile separating the Holcomb
schoolhouse from her father’s farm ranch. Often, if the day
was warm and sun-kindled, they stopped along the way and
sat by the river, a snaky, slow-moving, brown piece of the
Arkansas.
Once Nancy had said to him, “One summer, when we were
in Colorado, Isaw where the Arkansas begins. The exact
place. You wouldn’t believe it, though. That it was our river.
It’s not the same color. But pure as drinking water. And fast.
And full of rocks. Whirlpools. Daddy caught a trout.” It had
stayed with Bobby, her memory of the river’s source, and
since her death . . . Well, he couldn’t explain it, but
whenever he looked at the Arkansas, it was for an instant
transformed, and what he saw was not a muddy stream
meandering across the Kansas plains, but what Nancy had
described—a Colorado torrent, a chilly, crystal trout river
speeding down a mountain valley. That was how Nancy had
been: like young water—energetic, joyous.
Usually, though, western Kansas winters are imprisoning,
and usually frost on the fields and razory winds have altered
the climate before Christmas. Some years back snow had
fallen on Christmas Eve and continued falling, and when
Bobby set out the next morning for the Clutter property, a
three-mile walk, he had had to fight through deep drifts. It
was worth it, for though he was numbed and scarlet, the
welcome he got thawed him thoroughly. Nancy was
amazed and proud, and her mother, often so timid and
distant, had hugged and kissed him, insisting that he wrap
up in a quilt and sit close to the parlor fire. While the women
worked in the kitchen, he and Kenyon and Mr. Clutter had
sat around the fire cracking walnuts and pecans, and Mr.
Clutter said he was reminded of another Christmas, when
he was Kenyon’s age: “There were seven of us. Mother, my
father, the two girls, and us three boys. We lived on a farm
a good ways from town. For that reason it was the custom
to do our Christmas buying in a bunch—make the trip once
and do it all together. The year I’m thinking of, the morning
we were supposed to go, the snow was high as today,
higher, and still coming down—flakes like saucers. Looked
like we were in for a snowbound Christmas with no
presents under the tree. Mother and the girls were
heartbroken. Then Ihad an idea.” He would saddle their
huskiest plow horse, ride into town, and shop for
everybody. The family agreed. All of them gave him their
Christmas savings and a list of the things they wished him
to buy: four yards of calico, a football, a pincushion, shotgun
shells—an assortment of orders that took until nightfall to fill.
Heading homeward, the purchases secure inside a
tarpaulin sack, he was grateful that his father had forced
him to carry a lantern, and glad, too, that the horse’s
harness was strung with bells, for both their jaunty racket
and the careening light of the kerosene lantern were a
comfort to him.
“The ride in, that was easy, a piece of cake. But now the
road was gone, and every landmark.” Earth and air—all
was snow. The horse, up to his haunches in it, slipped
sidewise. “Idropped our lamp. We were lost in the night. It
was just a question of time before we fell asleep and froze.
Yes, Iwas afraid. But Iprayed. And Ifelt God’s
presence . . .” Dogs howled. He followed the noise until he
saw the windows of a neighboring farmhouse. “Iought to
have stopped there. But Ithought of the family—imagined
my mother in tears, Dad and the boys getting up a search
party, and Ipushed on. So, naturally, Iwasn’t too happy
when finally Ireached home and found the house dark.
Doors locked. Found everybody had gone to bed and plain
forgot me. None of them could understand why Iwas so put
out. Dad said, ‘We were sure you’d stay the night in town.
Good grief, boy! Who’d have thought you hadn’t better
sense than to start home in a perfect blizzard?’ ”
The cider-tart odor of spoiling apples. Apple trees and
pear trees, peach and cherry: Mr. Clutter’s orchard, the
treasured assembly of fruit trees he had planted. Bobby,
running mindlessly, had not meant to come here, or to any
other part of River Valley Farm. It was inexplicable, and he
turned to leave, but he turned again and wandered toward
the house—white and solid and spacious. He had always
been impressed by it, and pleased to think that his girl
friend lived there. But now that it was deprived of the late
owner’s dedicated attention, the first threads of decay’s
cobweb were being spun. A gravel rake lay rusting in the
driveway; the lawn was parched and shabby. That fateful
Sunday, when the sheriff summoned ambulances to
remove the murdered family, the ambulances had driven
across the grass straight to the front door, and the tire
tracks were still visible.
The hired man’s house was empty, too; he had found new
quarters for his family nearer Holcomb—to no one’s
surprise, for nowadays, though the weather was glittering,
the Clutter place seemed shadowed, and hushed, and
motionless. But as Bobby passed a storage barn and,
beyond that, a livestock corral, he heard a horse’s tail
swish. It was Nancy’s Babe, the obedient old dappled mare
with flaxen mane and dark-purple eyes like magnificent
pansy blossoms. Clutching her mane, Bobby rubbed his
cheek along Babe’s neck—something Nancy used to do.
And Babe whinnied. Last Sunday, the last time he had
visited the Kidwells, Sue’s mother had mentioned Babe.
Mrs. Kidwell, a fanciful woman, had been standing at a
window watching dusk tint the outdoors, the sprawling
prairie. And out of the blue she had said, “Susan? You
know what Ikeep seeing? Nancy. On Babe. Coming this
way.”
Perry noticed them first—hitchhikers, a boy and an old
man, both carrying homemade knapsacks, and despite the
blowy weather, a gritty and bitter Texas wind, wearing only
overalls and a thin denim shirt. “Let’s give them a lift,” Perry
said. Dick was reluctant; he had no objection to assisting
hitchhikers, provided they looked as if they could pay their
way—at least “chip in a couple of gallons of gas.” But Perry,
little old big-hearted Perry, was always pestering Dick to
pick up the damnedest, sorriest-looking people. Finally
Dick agreed, and stopped the car.
The boy—a stocky, sharp-eyed, talkative towhead of about
twelve—was exuberantly grateful, but the old man, whose
face was seamed and yellow, feebly crawled into the back
seat and slumped there silently. The boy said, “We sure do
appreciate this. Johnny was ready to drop. We ain’t had a
ride since Galveston.”
Perry and Dick had left that port city an hour earlier, having
spent a morning there applying at various shipping offices
for jobs as able-bodied seamen. One company offered
them immediate work on a tanker bound for Brazil, and,
indeed, the two would now have been at sea if their
prospective employer had not discovered that neither man
possessed union papers or a passport. Strangely, Dick’s
disappointment exceeded Perry’s: “Brazil! That’s where
they’re building a whole new capital city. Right from scratch.
Imagine getting in on the ground floor of something like
that! Any fool could make a fortune.”
“Where you headed?” Perry asked the boy.
“Sweetwater.”
“Where’s Sweetwater?”
“Well, it’s along in this direction somewhere. It’s
somewhere in Texas. Johnny, here, he’s my gramp. And
he’s got a sister lives in Sweetwater. Least, Isure Jesus
hope she does. We thought she lived in Jasper, Texas. But
when we got to Jasper, folks told us her and her people
moved to Galveston. But she wasn’t in Galveston—lady
there said she was gone to Sweetwater. Isure Jesus hope
we find her. Johnny,” he said, rubbing the old man’s hands,
as if to thaw them, “you hear me, Johnny? We’re riding in a
nice warm Chevrolet—’56 model.”
The old man coughed, rolled his head slightly, opened and
closed his eyes, and coughed again.
Dick said, “Hey, listen. What’s wrong with him?”
“It’s the change,” the boy said. “And the walking. We been
walking since before Christmas. Seems to me we covered
the better part of Texas.” In the most matter-of-fact voice,
and while continuing to massage the old man’s hands, the
boy told them that up to the start of the present journey he
and his grandfather and an aunt had lived alone on a farm
near Shreveport, Louisiana. Not long ago the aunt had
died. “Johnny’s been poorly about a year, and Auntie had
all the work to do. With only me to help. We were chopping
firewood. Chopping up a stump. Right in the middle of it,
Auntie said she was wore out. Ever seen a horse just lay
down and never get up? Ihave. And that’s like what Auntie
did.” A few days before Christmas the man from whom his
grandfather rented the farm “turned us off the place,” the
boy continued. “That’s how come we started out for Texas.
Looking to find Mrs. Jackson. Inever seen her, but she’s
Johnny’s own blood sister. And somebody’s got to take us
in. Leastways, him. He can’t go a lot more. Last night it
rained on us.”
The car stopped. Perry asked Dick why he had stopped it.
“That man’s very sick,” Dick said.
“Well? What do you want to do? Put him out?”
“Use your head. Just for once.”
“You really are a mean bastard.”
“Suppose he dies?”
The boy said, “He won’t die. We’ve got this far, he’ll wait
now.”
Dick persisted. “Suppose he dies? Think of what could
happen. The questions.”
“Frankly, Idon’t give a damn. You want to put them out?
Then by all means.” Perry looked at the invalid, still
somnolent, dazed, deaf, and he looked at the boy, who
returned his gaze calmly, not begging, not “asking for
anything,” and Perry remembered himself at that age, his
own wanderings with an old man. “Go ahead. Put them out.
But I’ll be getting out, too.”
“O.K. O.K. O.K. Only don’t forget,” said Dick. “It’s your
damn fault.”
Dick shifted gears. Suddenly, as the car began to move
again, the boy hollered, “Hold it!” Hopping out, he hurried
along the edge of the road, stopped, stooped, picked up
one, two, three, four empty Coca-Cola bottles, ran back,
and hopped in, happy and grinning. “There’s plenty of
money in bottles,” he said to Dick. “Why, mister, if you was
to drive kind of slow, Iguarantee you we can pick us up a
big piece of change. That’s what me and Johnny been
eating off. Refund money.”
Dick was amused, but he was also interested, and when
next the boy commanded him to halt, he at once obeyed.
The commands came so frequently that it took them an
hour to travel five miles, but it was worth it. The kid had an
“honest-to-God genius” for spotting, amid the roadside
rocks and grassy rubble, and the brown glow of thrown-
away beer bottles, the emerald daubs that had once held 7-
Up and Canada Dry. Perry soon developed his own
personal gift for spying out bottles. At first he merely
indicated to the boy the whereabouts of his finds; he
thought it too undignified to scurry about collecting them
himself. It was all “pretty silly,” just “kid stuff.” Nevertheless,
the game generated a treasure-hunt excitement, and
presently he, too, succumbed to the fun, the fervor of this
quest for refundable empties. Dick, too, but Dick was in
dead earnest. Screwy as it seemed, maybe this was a way
to make some money—or, at any rate, a few bucks. Lord
knows, he and Perry could use them; their combined
finances amounted at the moment to less than five dollars.
Now all three—Dick and the boy and Perry—were piling out
of the car and shamelessly, though amiably, competing with
one another. Once Dick located a cache of wine and
whiskey bottles at the bottom of a ditch, and was chagrined
to learn that his discovery was valueless. “They don’t give
no refund on liquor empties,” the boy informed him. “Even
some of the beers ain’t no good. Idon’t mess with them
usually. Just stick with the surefire things. Dr. Pepper.
Pepsi. Coke. White Rock. Nehi.”
Dick said, “What’s your name?”
“Bill,” the boy said.
“Well, Bill. You’re a regular education.”
Nightfall came, and forced the hunters to quit—that, and
lack of space, for they had amassed as many bottles as the
car could contain. The trunk was filled, the back seat
seemed a glittering dump heap; unnoticed, unmentioned by
even his grandson, the ailing old man was all but hidden
under the shifting, dangerously chiming cargo.
Dick said, “Be funny if we had a smash-up.”
A bunch of lights publicized the New Motel, which proved to
be, as the travelers neared it, an impressive compound
consisting of bungalows, a garage, a restaurant, and a
cocktail lounge. Taking charge, the boy said to Dick, “Pull
in there. Maybe we can make a deal. Only let me talk. I’ve
had the experience. Sometimes they try to cheat.” Perry
could not imagine “anyone smart enough to cheat that kid,”
he said later. “It didn’t shame him a bit going in there with
all those bottles. Me, Inever could’ve, I’d have felt so
ashamed. But the people at the motel were nice about it;
they just laughed. Turned out the bottles were worth twelve
dollars and sixty cents.”
The boy divided the money evenly, giving half to himself, the
rest to his partners, and said, “Know what? I’m gonna blow
me and Johnny to a good feed. Ain’t you fellows hungry?”
As always, Dick was. And after so much activity, even Perry
felt starved. As he later told about it, “We carted the old
man into the restaurant and propped him up at a table. He
looked exactly the same—thanatoid. And he never said
one word. But you should have seen him shovel it in. The
kid ordered him pancakes; he said that was what Johnny
liked best. Iswear he ate something like thirty pancakes.
With maybe two pounds of butter, and a quart of syrup. The
kid could put it down himself. Potato chips and ice cream,
that was all he wanted, but he sure ate a lot of them. I
wonder it didn’t make him sick.”
During the dinner party, Dick, who had consulted a map,
announced that Sweetwater was a hundred or more miles
west of the route he was driving—the route that would take
him across New Mexico and Arizona to Nevada—to Las
Vegas. Though this was true, it was clear to Perry that Dick
simply wanted to rid himself of the boy and the old man.
Dick’s purpose was obvious to the boy, too, but he was
polite and said, “Oh, don’t you worry about us. Plenty of
traffic must stop here. We’ll get a ride.”
The boy walked with them to the car, leaving the old man to
devour a fresh stack of pancakes. He shook hands with
Dick and with Perry, wished them a Happy New Year, and
waved them away into the dark.
The evening of Wednesday, December 30, was a
memorable one in the household of Agent A. A. Dewey.
Remembering it later, his wife said, “Alvin was singing in
the bath. ‘The Yellow Rose of Texas.’ The kids were
watching TV. And Iwas setting the dining-room table. For a
buffet. I’m from New Orleans; Ilove to cook and entertain,
and my mother had just sent us a crate of avocados and
black-eyed peas, and—oh, a heap of real nice things. So I
decided: We’re going to have a buffet, invite some friends
over—the Murrays, and Cliff and Dodie Hope. Alvin didn’t
want to, but Iwas determined. My goodness! The case
could go on forever, and he hadn’t taken hardly a minute off
since it began. Well, Iwas setting the table, so when Iheard
the phone Iasked one of the boys to answer it—Paul. Paul
said it was for Daddy, and Isaid, ‘You tell them he’s in the
bath,’ but Paul said he wondered if he ought to do that,
because it was Mr. Sanford calling from Topeka. Alvin’s
boss. Alvin took the call with just a towel around him. Made
me so mad—dripping puddles everywhere. But when Iwent
to get a mop Isaw something worse—that cat, that fool
Pete, up on the kitchen table gorging crabmeat salad. My
avocado stuffing.
“The next thing was, suddenly Alvin had hold of me, he was
hugging me, and Isaid, ‘Alvin Dewey, have you lost your
mind?’ Fun’s fun, but the man was wet as a pond, he was
ruining my dress, and Iwas already dressed for company.
Of course, when Iunderstood why he was hugging me I
hugged him right back. You can imagine what it meant to
Alvin to know those men had been arrested. Out in Las
Vegas. He said he had to leave for Las Vegas
straightaway, and Iasked him hadn’t he ought to put on
some clothes first, and Alvin, he was so excited, he said,
‘Gosh, honey, Iguess I’ve spoiled your party!’ Icouldn’t
think of a happier way of having it spoiled—not if this meant
that maybe one day soon we’d be back living an ordinary
life. Alvin laughed—it was just beautiful to hear him. Imean,
the past two weeks had been the worst of all. Because the
week before Christmas those men turned up in Kansas
City—came and went without getting caught—and Inever
saw Alvin more depressed, except once when young Alvin
was in the hospital, had encephalitis, we thought we might
lose him. But Idon’t want to talk about that.
“Anyway, Imade coffee for him and took it to the bedroom,
where he was supposed to be getting dressed. But he
wasn’t. He was sitting on the edge of our bed holding his
head, as if he had a headache. Hadn’t put on even a sock.
So Isaid, ‘What do you want to do, get pneumonia?’ And
he looked at me and said, ‘Marie, listen, it’s got to be these
guys, has to, that’s the only logical solution.’ Alvin’s funny.
Like the first time he ran for Finney County Sheriff. Election
Night, when practically every vote had been counted and it
was plain as plain he’d won, he said—Icould have
strangled him—said over and over, ‘Well, we won’t know till
the last return.’
“Itold him, ‘Now, Alvin, don’t start that. Of course they did it.’
He said, ‘Where’s our proof? We can’t prove either of them
ever set foot inside the Clutter house!’ But that seemed to
me exactly what he could prove: footprints—weren’t
footprints the one thing those animals left behind? Alvin
said, ‘Yes, and a big lot of good they are—unless those
boys still happen to be wearing the boots that made them.
Just footprints by themselves aren’t worth a Dixie dollar.’ I
said, ‘All right, honey, drink your coffee and I’ll help you
pack.’ Sometimes you can’t reason with Alvin. The way he
kept on, he had me almost convinced Hickock and Smith
were innocent, and if they weren’t innocent they would never
confess, and if they didn’t confess they could never be
convicted—the evidence was too circumstantial. What
bothered him most, though—he was afraid that the story
would leak, that the men would learn the truth before the
K.B.I. could question them. As it was, they thought they’d
been picked up for parole violation. Passing bad checks.
And Alvin felt it was very important they keep thinking that.
He said, ‘The name Clutter has to hit them like a hammer, a
blow they never knew was coming.’
“Paul—I’d sent him out to the washline for some of Alvin’s
socks—Paul came back and stood around watching me
pack. He wanted to know where Alvin was going. Alvin
lifted him up in his arms. He said, ‘Can you keep a secret,
Pauly?’ Not that he needed to ask. Both boys know they
mustn’t talk about Alvin’s work—the bits and pieces they
hear around the house. So he said, ‘Pauly, you remember
those two fellows we’ve been looking for? Well, now we
know where they are, and Daddy’s going to go get them
and bring them here to Garden City.’ But Paul begged him,
‘Don’t do that, Daddy, don’t bring them here.’ He was
frightened—any nine-year-old might’ve been. Alvin kissed
him. He said. ‘Now that’s O.K., Pauly, we won’t let them hurt
anybody. They’re not going to hurt anybody ever again.”
At five that afternoon, some twenty minutes after the stolen
Chevrolet rolled off the Nevada desert into Las Vegas, the
long ride came to an end. But not before Perry had visited
the Las Vegas post office, where he claimed a package
addressed to himself in care of General Delivery—the large
cardboard box he had mailed from Mexico, and had
insured for a hundred dollars, a sum exceeding to an
impertinent extent the value of the contents, which were
suntans and denim pants, worn shirts, underwear, and two
pairs of steel-buckled boots. Waiting for Perry outside the
post office, Dick was in excellent spirits; he had reached a
decision that he was certain would eradicate his current
difficulties and start him on a new road, with a new rainbow
in view. The decision involved impersonating an Air Force
officer. It was a project that had long fascinated him, and
Las Vegas was the ideal place to try it out. He’d already
selected the officer’s rank and name, the latter borrowed
from a former acquaintance, the then warden of Kansas
State Penitentiary: Tracy Hand. As Captain Tracy Hand,
smartly clothed in a made-to-order uniform, Dick intended
to “crawl the strip,” Las Vegas’s street of never-closed
casinos. Small-time, big-time, the Sands, the Stardust—he
meant to hit them all, distributing en route “a bundle of
confetti.” By writing worthless checks right around the clock,
he expected to haul in three, maybe four thousand dollars
within a twenty-four-hour period. That was half the plot; the
second half was: Goodbye, Perry. Dick was sick of him—
his harmonica, his aches and ills, his superstitions, the
weepy, womanly eyes, the nagging, whispering voice.
Suspicious, self-righteous, spiteful, he was like a wife that
must be got rid of. And there was but one way to do it: Say
nothing—just go.
Absorbed in his plans, Dick did not notice a patrol car pass
him, slow down, reconnoiter. Nor did Perry, descending the
post office steps with the Mexican box balanced on a
shoulder, observe the prowling car and the policemen in it.
Officers Ocie Pigford and Francis Macauley carried in their
heads pages of memorized data, including a description of
a black-and-white 1956 Chevrolet bearing Kansas license
plate no. Jo 16212. Neither Perry nor Dick was aware of
the police vehicle trailing them as they pulled away from the
post office, and with Dick driving and Perry directing, they
traveled five blocks north, turned left, then right, drove a
quarter mile more, and stopped in front of a dying palm tree
and a weather-wrecked sign from which all calligraphy had
faded except the word “OOM.”
“This it?” Dick asked.
Perry, as the patrol car drew alongside, nodded.
The Detective Division of the Las Vegas City Jail contains
two interrogation rooms—fluorescent-lighted chambers
measuring ten by twelve, with walls and ceilings of celotex.
In each room, in addition to an electric fan, a metal table,
and folding metal chairs, there are camouflaged
microphones, concealed tape recorders, and, set into the
door, a mirrored one-way observation window. On
Saturday, the second day of 1960, both rooms were
booked for 2:00 P.M.—the hour that four detectives from
Kansas had selected for their first confrontation of Hickock
and Smith.
Shortly before the appointed moment, the quartet of K.B.I.
agents—Harold Nye, Roy Church, Alvin Dewey, and
Clarence Duntz—gathered in a corridor outside the
interrogation rooms. Nye was running a temperature. “Part
flu. But mostly sheer excitement,” he subsequently informed
a journalist. “By then I’d already been waiting in Las Vegas
two days—took the next plane out after news of the arrest
reached our headquarters in Topeka. The rest of the team,
Al and Roy and Clarence, came on by car—had a lousy
trip, too. Lousy weather. Spent New Year’s Eve snowed up
in a motel in Albuquerque. Boy, when they finally hit Vegas,
they needed good whiskey and good news. Iwas ready
with both. Our young men had signed waivers of extradition.
Better yet: We had the boots, both pairs, and the soles—
the Cat’s Paw and the diamond pattern—matched perfectly
life-size photographs of the footprints found in the Clutter
house. The boots were in a box of stuff the boys picked up
at the post office just before the curtain fell. Like Itold Al
Dewey, suppose the squeeze had come five minutes
sooner!
“Even so, our case was very shaky—nothing that couldn’t
be pulled apart. But Iremember, while we were waiting in
the corridor—Iremember being feverish and nervous as
hell, but confident. We all were; we felt we were on the
edge of the truth. My job, mine and Church’s, was to
pressure it out of Hickock. Smith belonged to Al and Old
Man Duntz. At that time Ihadn’t seen the suspects—just
examined their possessions and arranged the extradition
waivers. I’d never laid eyes on Hickock until he was brought
down to the interrogation room. I’d imagined a bigger guy.
Brawnier. Not some skinny kid. He was twenty-eight, but he
looked like a kid. Hungry—right down to the bone. He was
wearing a blue shirt and suntans and white socks and black
shoes. We shook hands; his hand was drier than mine.
Clean, polite, nice voice, good diction, a pretty decent-
looking fellow, with a very disarming smile—and in the
beginning he smiled quite a lot.
“Isaid, ‘Mr. Hickock, my name is Harold Nye, and this other
gentleman is Mr. Roy Church. We’re Special Agents of the
Kansas Bureau of Investigation, and we’ve come here to
discuss your parole violation. Of course, you’re under no
obligation to answer our questions, and anything you say
may be used against you in evidence. You’re entitled to a
lawyer at all times. We’ll use no force, no threats, and we’ll
make you no promises.’ He was calm as could be.”
“I know the form,” Dick said. “I’ve been questioned before.”
“Now, Mr. Hickock—”
“Dick.”
“Dick, we want to talk to you about your activities since your
parole. To our knowledge, you’ve gone on at least two big
check sprees in the Kansas City area.”
“Uh-huh. Hung out quite a few.”
“Could you give us a list?”
The prisoner, evidently proud of his one authentic gift, a
brilliant memory, recited the names and addresses of
twenty Kansas City stores, cafés, and garages, and
recalled, accurately, the “purchase” made at each and the
amount of the check passed.
“I’m curious, Dick. Why do these people accept your
checks? I’d like to know the secret.”
“The secret is: People are dumb.”
Roy Church said, “Fine, Dick. Very funny. But just for the
moment let’s forget these checks.” Though he sounds as if
his throat were lined with hog bristle, and has hands so
hardened that he can punch stone walls (his favorite stunt,
in fact), persons have been known to mistake Church for a
kindly little man, somebody’s bald-headed, pink-cheeked
uncle. “Dick,” he said, “suppose you tell us something about
your family background.”
The prisoner reminisced. Once, when he was nine or ten,
his father had fallen ill. “It was rabbit fever,” and the illness
lasted many months, during which the family had depended
upon church assistance and the charity of neighbors
—“otherwise we would’ve starved.” That episode aside, his
childhood had been O.K. “We never had much money, but
we were never really down-and-out,” Hickock said. “We
always had clean clothes and something to eat. My dad
was strict, though. He wasn’t happy unless he had me
doing chores. But we got along O.K.—no serious
arguments. My parents never argued, either. Ican’t recall a
single quarrel. She’s wonderful, my mother. Dad’s a good
guy, too. I’d say they did the best for me they could.”
School? Well, he felt he might have been more than an
average student if he had contributed to books a fraction of
the time he’d “wasted” on sports. “Baseball. Football. I
made all the teams. After high school Icould have gone to
college on a football scholarship. Iwanted to study
engineering, but even with a scholarship, deals like that
cost plenty. Idon’t know, it seemed safer to get a job.”
Before his twenty-first birthday Hickock had worked as a
railway trackman, an ambulance driver, a car painter, and a
garage mechanic; he’d also married a girl sixteen years
old. “Carol. Her father was a minister. He was dead against
me. Said Iwas a full-time nobody. He made all the trouble
he could. But Iwas nuts about Carol. Still am. There’s a real
princess. Only—see, we had three kids. Boys. And we
were too young to have three kids. Maybe if we hadn’t got
so deep into debt. If Icould’ve earned extra money. Itried.”
He tried gambling, and started forging checks and
experimenting with other forms of theft. In 1958 he was
convicted of house burglary in a Johnson County court and
sentenced to five years in Kansas State Penitentiary. But
by then Carol had departed and he’d taken as a bride
another girl aged sixteen. “Mean as hell. Her and her whole
family. She divorced me while Iwas inside. I’m not
complaining. Last August, when Ileft The Walls, Ifigured I
had every chance to start new. Igot a job in Olathe, lived
with my family, and stayed home nights. Iwas doing swell
—”
“Until November twentieth,” said Nye, and Hickock seemed
not to understand him. “The day you stopped doing swell
and started hanging paper. Why?”
Hickock sighed, and said, “That would make a book.” Then,
smoking a cigarette borrowed from Nye and lighted by the
courteous Church, he said, “Perry—my buddy Perry Smith
—was paroled in the spring. Later on, when Icame out, he
sent me a letter. Postmarked Idaho. He wrote reminding
me of this deal we used to talk over. About Mexico. The
idea was we would go to Acapulco, one of them places,
buy a fishing boat, and run it ourselves—take tourists deep-
sea fishing.”
Nye said, “This boat. How did you plan to pay for it?”
“I’m coming to that,” Hickock said. “See, Perry wrote me he
had a sister living in Fort Scott. And she was holding some
heavy change for him. Several thousand dollars. Money his
dad owed him from the sale of some property up in Alaska.
He said he was coming to Kansas to get the dough.”
“And the two of you would use it to buy a boat.”
“Correct.”
“But it didn’t work out that way.”
“What happened was, Perry showed up maybe a month
later. Imet him at the bus station in Kansas City—”
“When?” said Church. “The day of the week.”
“A Thursday.”
“And when did you go to Fort Scott?”
“Saturday.”
“November fourteenth.”
Hickock’s eyes flashed with surprise. One could see that he
was asking himself why Church should be so certain of the
date; and hurriedly—for it was too soon to stir suspicions—
the detective said, “What time did you leave for Fort Scott?”
“That afternoon. We did some work on my car, and had a
bowl of chili at the West Side Café. It must have been
around three.”
“Around three. Was Perry Smith’s sister expecting you?”
“No. Because, see, Perry lost her address. And she didn’t
have a telephone.”
“Then how did you expect to find her?”
“By inquiring at the post office.”
“Did you?”
“Perry did. They said she’d moved away. To Oregon, they
thought. But she hadn’t left any forwarding address.”
“Must have been quite a blow. After you’d been counting on
a big piece of money like that.”
Hickock agreed. “Because—well, we’d definitely decided
to go to Mexico. Otherwise, Inever would’ve cashed them
checks. But Ihoped . . . Now listen to me; I’m telling the
truth. Ithought once we got to Mexico and began making
money, then I’d be able to pay them off. The checks.”
Nye took over. “One minute, Dick.” Nye is a short, short-
tempered man who has difficulty moderating his
aggressive vigor, his talent for language both sharp and
outspoken. “I’d like to hear a little more about the trip to Fort
Scott,” he said, soft-pedaling. “When you found Smith’s
sister no longer there, what did you do then?”
“Walked around. Had a beer. Drove back.”
“You mean you went home?”
“No. To Kansas City. We stopped at the Zesto Drive-In. Ate
hamburgers. We tried Cherry Row.”
Neither Nye nor Church was familiar with Cherry Row.
Hickock said, “You kiddin’? Every cop in Kansas knows it.”
When the detectives again pleaded ignorance, he
explained that it was a stretch of park where one
encountered “hustlers mostly,” adding, “but plenty of
amateurs, too. Nurses. Secretaries. I’ve had a lot of luck
there.”
“And this particular evening. Have any luck?”
“The bad kind. We ended up with a pair of rollers.”
“Named?”
“Mildred. The other one, Perry’s girl, Ithink she was called
Joan.”
“Describe them.”
“Maybe they were sisters. Both blond. Plump. I’m not too
clear about it. See, we’d bought a bottle of ready-mix
Orange Blossoms—that’s orange pop and vodka—and I
was getting stiff. We gave the girls a few drinks and drove
them out to Fun Haven. Iimagine you gentlemen never
heard of Fun Haven?”
They hadn’t.
Hickock grinned and shrugged. “It’s on the Blue Ridge
Road. Eight miles south of Kansas City. A combination
night-club-motel. You pay ten bucks for the key to a cabin.”
Continuing, he described the cabin in which he claimed that
the foursome had stayed the night: twin beds, an old Coca-
Cola calendar, a radio that wouldn’t play unless the
customer deposited a quarter. His poise, his explicitness,
the assured presentation of verifiable detail impressed Nye
—though, of course, the boy was lying. Well, wasn’t he?
Whether because of flu and fever or an abrupt lessening in
the warmth of his confidence, Nye exuded an icy sweat.
“Next morning we woke up to find they’d rolled us and beat
it,” said Hickock. “Didn’t get much off me. But Perry lost his
wallet, with forty or fifty dollars.”
“What did you do about it?”
“There wasn’t nothing to do.”
“You could’ve notified the police.”
“Aw, come on. Quit it. Notify the police. For your
information, a guy on parole’s not allowed to booze. Or
associate with another Old Grad—”
“All right, Dick. It’s Sunday. The fifteenth of November. Tell
us what you did that day from the moment you checked out
of Fun Haven.”
“Well, we ate breakfast at a truck stop near Happy Hill.
Then we drove to Olathe, and Idropped Perry off at the
hotel where he was living. I’d say that was around eleven.
Afterward, Iwent home and had dinner with the family.
Same as every Sunday. Watched TV—a basketball game,
or maybe it was football. Iwas pretty tired.”
“When did you next see Perry Smith?”
“Monday. He came by where Iworked. Bob Sands’ Body
Shop.”
“And what did you talk about? Mexico?”
“Well, we still liked the idea, even if we hadn’t got hold of
the money to do all we had in mind—put ourselves in
business down there. But we wanted to go, and it seemed
worth the risk.”
“Worth another stretch in Lansing?”
“That didn’t figure. See, we never intended coming
Stateside again.”
Nye, who had been jotting notes in a notebook, said, “On
the day following the check spree—that would be the
twenty-first—you and your friend Smith disappeared. Now,
Dick, please outline your movements between then and the
time of your arrest here in Las Vegas. Just a rough idea.”
Hickock whistled and rolled his eyes. “Wow!” he said, and
then, summoning his talent for something very like total
recall, he began an account of the long ride—the
approximately ten thousand miles he and Smith had
covered in the past six weeks. He talked for an hour and
twenty-five minutes—from two-fifty to four-fifteen—and told,
while Nye attempted to list them, of highways and hotels,
motels, rivers, towns, and cities, a chorus of entwining
names: Apache, El Paso, Corpus Christi, Santillo, San Luis
Potosí, Acapulco, San Diego, Dallas, Omaha, Sweetwater,
Stillwater, Tenville Junction, Tallahassee, Needles, Miami,
Hotel Nuevo Waldorf, Somerset Hotel, Hotel Simone,
Arrowhead Motel, Cherokee Motel, and many, many more.
He gave them the name of the man in Mexico to whom he’d
sold his own old 1949 Chevrolet, and confessed that he
had stolen a newer model in Iowa. He described persons
he and his partner had met: a Mexican widow, rich and
sexy; Otto, a German “millionaire”; a “swish” pair of Negro
prizefighters driving a “swish” lavender Cadillac; the blind
proprietor of a Florida rattlesnake farm; a dying old man
and his grandson; and others. And when he had finished he
sat with folded arms and a pleased smile, as though
waiting to be commended for the humor, the clarity, and the
candor of his traveler’s tale.
But Nye, in pursuit of the narrative, raced his pen, and
Church, lazily slamming a shut hand against an open palm,
said nothing—until suddenly he said, “Iguess you know why
we’re here.”
Hickock’s mouth straightened—his posture, too.
“Iguess you realize we wouldn’t have come all the way to
Nevada just to chat with a couple of two-bit check
chiselers.”
Nye had closed the notebook. He, too, stared at the
prisoner, and observed that a cluster of veins had
appeared in his left temple.
“Would we, Dick?”
“What?”
“Come this far to talk about a bunch of checks.”
“Ican’t think of any other reason.”
Nye drew a dagger on the cover of his notebook. While
doing so, he said, “Tell me, Dick. Have you ever heard of
the Clutter murder case?” Whereupon, he later wrote in a
formal report of the interview, “Suspect underwent an
intense visible reaction. He turned gray. His eyes twitched.”
Hickock said, “Whoa, now. Hold on here. I’m no goddam
killer.”
“The question asked,” Church reminded him, “was whether
you’d heard of the Clutter murders.”
“Imay have read something,” Hickock said.
“A vicious crime. Vicious. Cowardly.”
“And almost perfect,” Nye said. “But you made two
mistakes, Dick. One was, you left a witness. A living
witness. Who’ll testify in court. Who’ll stand in the witness
box and tell a jury how Richard Hickock and Perry Smith
bound and gagged and slaughtered four helpless people.”
Hickock’s face reddened with returning color. “Living
witness! There can’t be!”
“Because you thought you’d got rid of everyone?”
“Isaid whoa! There ain’t anybody can connect me with any
goddam murder. Checks. A little petty thievery. But I’m no
goddam killer.”
“Then why,” Nye asked hotly, “have you been lying to us?”
“I’ve been telling you the goddam truth.”
“Now and then. Not always. For instance, what about
Saturday afternoon, November fourteenth? You say you
drove to Fort Scott.”
“Yes.”
“And when you got there you went to the post office.”
“Yes.”
“To obtain the address of Perry Smith’s sister.”
“That’s right.”
Nye rose. He walked around to the rear of Hickock’s chair,
and placing his hands on the back of the chair, leaned
down as though to whisper in the prisoner’s ear. “Perry
Smith has no sister living in Fort Scott,” he said. “He never
has had. And on Saturday afternoons the Fort Scott post
office happens to be closed.” Then he said, “Think it over,
Dick. That’s all for now. We’ll talk to you later.”
After Hickock’s dismissal, Nye and Church crossed the
corridor, and looking through the one-way observation
window set in the door of the interrogation room, watched
the questioning of Perry Smith—a scene visible though not
audible. Nye, who was seeing Smith for the first time, was
fascinated by his feet—by the fact that his legs were so
short that his feet, as small as a child’s, couldn’t quite make
the floor. Smith’s head—the stiff Indian hair, the Irish-Indian
blending of dark skin and pert, impish features—reminded
him of the suspect’s pretty sister, the nice Mrs. Johnson.
But this chunky, misshapen child-man was not pretty; the
pink end of his tongue darted forth, flickering like the tongue
of a lizard. He was smoking a cigarette, and from the
evenness of his exhalations Nye deduced that he was still a
“virgin”—that is, still uninformed about the real purpose of
the interview.
Nye was right. For Dewey and Duntz, patient
professionals, had gradually narrowed the prisoner’s life
story to the events of the last seven weeks, then reduced
those to a concentrated recapitulation of the crucial
weekend—Saturday noon to Sunday noon, November 14
to 15. Now, having spent three hours preparing the way,
they were not far from coming to the point.
Dewey said, “Perry, let’s review our position. Now, when
you received parole, it was on condition that you never
return to Kansas.”
“The Sunflower State. Icried my eyes out.”
“Feeling that way, why did you go back? You must have had
some very strong reason.”
“Itold you. To see my sister. To get the money she was
holding for me.”
“Oh, yes. The sister you and Hickock tried to find in Fort
Scott. Perry, how far is Fort Scott from Kansas City?”
Smith shook his head. He didn’t know.
“Well, how long did it take you to drive there?”
No response.
“One hour? Two? Three? Four?”
The prisoner said he couldn’t remember.
“Of course you can’t. Because you’ve never in your life
been to Fort Scott.”
Until then, neither of the detectives had challenged any part
of Smith’s statement. He shifted in his chair; with the tip of
his tongue he wet his lips.
“The fact is, nothing you’ve told us is true. You never set foot
in Fort Scott. You never picked up any two girls and never
took them to any motel—”
“We did. No kidding.”
“What were their names?”
“Inever asked.”
“You and Hickock spent the night with these women and
never asked their names?”
“They were just prostitutes.”
“Tell us the name of the motel.”
“Ask Dick. He’ll know. Inever remember junk like that.”
Dewey addressed his colleague. “Clarence, Ithink it’s time
we straightened Perry out.”
Duntz hunched forward. He is a heavyweight with a
welterweight’s spontaneous agility, but his eyes are
hooded and lazy. He drawls; each word, formed reluctantly
and framed in a cattle-country accent, lasts awhile. “Yes,
sir,” he said. “ ’Bout time.”
“Listen good, Perry. Because Mr. Duntz is going to tell you
where you really were that Saturday night. Where you were
and what you were doing.”
Duntz said, “You were killing the Clutter family.”
Smith swallowed. He began to rub his knees.
“You were out in Holcomb, Kansas. In the home of Mr.
Herbert W. Clutter. And before you left that house you killed
all the people in it.”
“Never. Inever.”
“Never what?”
“Knew anybody by that name. Clutter.”
Dewey called him a liar, and then, conjuring a card that in
prior consultation the four detectives had agreed to play
face down, told him, “We have a living witness, Perry.
Somebody you boys overlooked.”
A full minute elapsed, and Dewey exulted in Smith’s
silence, for an innocent man would ask who was this
witness, and who were these Clutters, and why did they
think he’d murdered them—would, at any rate, say
something. But Smith sat quiet, squeezing his knees.
“Well, Perry?”
“You got an aspirin? They took away my aspirin.”
“Feeling bad?”
“My legs do.”
It was five-thirty. Dewey, intentionally abrupt, terminated the
interview. “We’ll take this up again tomorrow,” he said. “By
the way, do you know what tomorrow is? Nancy Clutter’s
birthday. She would have been seventeen.”
“She would have been seventeen.” Perry, sleepless in the
dawn hours, wondered (he later recalled) if it was true that
today was the girl’s birthday, and decided no, that it was
just another way of getting under his skin, like that phony
business about a witness—“a living witness.” There
couldn’t be. Or did they mean— If only he could talk to Dick!
But he and Dick were being kept apart; Dick was locked in
a cell on another floor. “Listen good, Perry. Because Mr.
Duntz is going to tell you where you really were . . .” Midway
in the questioning, after he’d begun to notice the number of
allusions to a particular November weekend, he’d nerved
himself for what he knew was coming, yet when it did, when
the big cowboy with the sleepy voice said, “You were killing
the Clutter family”—well, he’d damn near died, that’s all. He
must have lost ten pounds in two seconds. Thank God he
hadn’t let them see it. Or hoped he hadn’t. And Dick?
Presumably they’d pulled the same stunt on him. Dick was
smart, a convincing performer, but his “guts” were
unreliable, he panicked too easily. Even so, and however
much they pressured him, Perry was sure Dick would hold
out. Unless he wanted to hang. “And before you left that
house you killed all the people in it.” It wouldn’t amaze him if
every Old Grad in Kansas had heard that line. They must
have questioned hundreds of men, and no doubt accused
dozens; he and Dick were merely two more. On the other
hand—well, would Kansas send four Special Agents a
thousand miles to pick up a small-time pair of parole
violators? Maybe somehow they had stumbled on
something, somebody—“a living witness.” But that was
impossible. Except— He’d give an arm, a leg to talk to
Dick for just five minutes.
And Dick, awake in a cell on the floor below, was (he later
recalled) equally eager to converse with Perry—find out
what the punk had told them. Christ, you couldn’t trust him to
remember even the outline of the Fun Haven alibi—though
they had discussed it often enough. And when those
bastards threatened him with a witness! Ten to one the little
spook had thought they meant an eyewitness. Whereas he,
Dick, had known at once who the so-called witness must
be: Floyd Wells, his old friend and former cellmate. While
serving the last weeks of his sentence, Dick had plotted to
knife Floyd—stab him through the heart with a handmade
“shiv”—and what a fool he was not to have done it. Except
for Perry, Floyd Wells was the one human being who could
link the names Hickock and Clutter. Floyd, with his sloping
shoulders and inclining chin—Dick had thought he’d be too
afraid. The sonofabitch was probably expecting some fancy
reward—a parole or money, or both. But hell would freeze
before he got it. Because a convict’s tattle wasn’t proof.
Proof is footprints, fingerprints, witnesses, a confession.
Hell, if all those cowboys had to go on was some story
Floyd Wells had told, then there wasn’t a lot to worry about.
Come right down to it, Floyd wasn’t half as dangerous as
Perry. Perry, if he lost his nerve and let fly, could put them
both in The Corner. And suddenly he saw the truth: It was
Perry he ought to have silenced. On a mountain road in
Mexico. Or while walking across the Mojave. Why had it
never occurred to him until now? For now, now was much
too late.
Ultimately, at five minutes past three that afternoon, Smith
admitted the falsity of the Fort Scott tale. “That was only
something Dick told his family. So he could stay out
overnight. Do some drinking. See, Dick’s dad watched him
pretty close—afraid he’d break parole. So we made up an
excuse about my sister. It was just to pacify Mr. Hickock.”
Otherwise, he repeated the same story again and again,
and Duntz and Dewey, regardless of how often they
corrected him and accused him of lying, could not make
him change it—except to add fresh details. The names of
the prostitutes, he recalled today, were Mildred and Jane
(or Joan). “They rolled us,” he now remembered. “Walked
off with all our dough while we were asleep.” And though
even Duntz had forfeited his composure—had shed, along
with tie and coat, his enigmatic drowsy dignity—the
suspect seemed content and serene; he refused to budge.
He’d never heard of the Clutters or Holcomb, or even
Garden City.
Across the hall, in the smoke-choked room where Hickock
was undergoing his second interrogation, Church and Nye
were methodically applying a more roundabout strategy.
Not once during this interview, now almost three hours old,
had either of them mentioned murder—an omission that
kept the prisoner edgy, expectant. They talked of everything
else: Hickock’s religious philosophy (“Iknow about hell. I
been there. Maybe there’s a heaven, too. Lots of rich
people think so”); his sexual history (“I’ve always behaved
like a one-hundred-percent normal”); and, once more, the
history of his recent cross-country hegira (“Why we kept
going like that, the only reason was we were looking for
jobs. Couldn’t find anything decent, though. Iworked one
day digging a ditch . . .”). But things unspoken were the
center of interest—the cause, the detectives were
convinced, of Hickock’s escalating distress. Presently, he
shut his eyes and touched the lids with trembling fingertips.
And Church said, “Something wrong?”
“A headache. Iget real bastards.”
Then Nye said, “Look at me, Dick.” Hickock obeyed, with
an expression that the detective interpreted as a pleading
with him to speak, to accuse, and let the prisoner escape
into the sanctuary of steadfast denial. “When we discussed
the matter yesterday, you may recall my saying that the
Clutter murders were almost a perfect crime. The killers
made only two mistakes. The first one was they left a
witness. The second—well, I’ll show you.” Rising, he
retrieved from a corner a box and a briefcase, both of
which he’d brought into the room at the start of the
interview. Out of the briefcase came a large photograph.
“This,” he said, leaving it on the table, “is a one-to-one
reproduction of certain footprints found near Mr. Clutter’s
body. And here”—he opened the box—“are the boots that
made them. Your boots, Dick.” Hickock looked, and looked
away. He rested his elbows on his knees and cradled his
head in his hands. “Smith,” said Nye, “was even more
careless. We have his boots, too, and they exactly fit
another set of prints. Bloody ones.”
Church closed in. “Here’s what’s going to happen to you,
Hickock,” he said. “You’ll be taken back to Kansas. You’ll
be charged on four counts of first-degree murder. Count
One: That on or about the fifteenth day of November, 1959,
one Richard Eugene Hickock did unlawfully, feloniously,
willfully and with deliberation and premeditation, and while
being engaged in the perpetration of a felony, kill and take
the life of Herbert W. Clutter. Count Two: That on or about
the fifteenth day of November 1959, the same Richard
Eugene Hickock did unlawfully—”
Hickock said, “Perry Smith killed the Clutters.” He lifted his
head, and slowly straightened up in the chair, like a fighter
staggering to his feet. “It was Perry. Icouldn’t stop him. He
killed them all.”
Postmistress Clare, enjoying a coffee break at Hartman’s
Café, complained of the low volume of the café’s radio.
“Turn it up,” she demanded.
The radio was tuned to Garden City’s Station KIUL. She
heard the words “. . . after sobbing out his dramatic
confession, Hickock emerged from the interrogation room
and fainted in a hallway. K.B.I. agents caught him as he fell
to the floor. The agents quoted Hickock as saying he and
Smith invaded the Clutter home expecting to find a safe
containing at least ten thousand dollars. But there was no
safe, so they tied the family up and shot them one by one.
Smith has neither confirmed nor denied taking part in the
crime. When told that Hickock had signed a confession,
Smith said, ‘I’d like to see my buddy’s statement.’ But the
request was rejected. Officers have declined to reveal
whether it was Hickock or Smith who actually shot the
members of the family. They emphasized that the statement
was only Hickock’s version. K.B.I. personnel, returning the
two men to Kansas, have already left Las Vegas by car. It
is expected the party will arrive in Garden City late
Wednesday. Meanwhile, County Attorney Duane West . . .”
“One by one,” said Mrs. Hartman. “Just imagine. Idon’t
wonder the varmint fainted.”
Others in the café—Mrs. Clare and Mabel Helm and a
husky young farmer who had stopped to buy a plug of
Brown’s Mule chewing tobacco—muttered and mumbled.
Mrs. Helm dabbed at her eyes with a paper napkin. “Iwon’t
listen,” she said. “Imustn’t. Iwon’t.”
“. . . news of a break in the case has met with little reaction
in the town of Holcomb, a half mile from the Clutter home.
Generally, townspeople in the community of two hundred
and seventy expressed relief . . .”
The young farmer hooted. “Relief! Last night, after we heard
it on the TV, know what my wife did? Bawled like a baby.”
“Shush,” said Mrs. Clare. “That’s me.”
“. . . and Holcomb’s postmistress, Mrs. Myrtle Clare, said
the residents are glad the case has been solved, but some
of them still feel others may be involved. She said plenty of
folks are still keeping their doors locked and their guns
ready . . .”
Mrs. Hartman laughed. “Oh, Myrt!” she said. “Who’d you tell
that to?”
“A reporter from the Telegram.”
The men of her acquaintance, many of them, treat Mrs.
Clare as though she were another man. The farmer
slapped her on the back and said, “Gosh, Myrt. Gee, fella.
You don’t still think one of us—anybody round here—had
something to do with it?”
But that, of course, was what Mrs. Clare did think, and
though she was usually alone in her opinions, this time she
was not without company, for the majority of Holcomb’s
population, having lived for seven weeks amid
unwholesome rumors, general mistrust, and suspicion,
appeared to feel disappointed at being told that the
murderer was not someone among themselves. Indeed, a
sizable faction refused to accept the fact that two unknown
men, two thieving strangers, were solely responsible. As
Mrs. Clare now remarked, “Maybe they did it, these fellows.
But there’s more to it than that. Wait. Some day they’ll get
to the bottom, and when they do they’ll find the one behind
it. The one wanted Clutter out of the way. The brains.”
Mrs. Hartman sighed. She hoped Myrt was wrong. And
Mrs. Helm said, “What Ihope is, Ihope they keep ’em
locked up good. Iwon’t feel easy knowing they’re in our
vicinity.”
“Oh, Idon’t think you got to worry, ma’am,” said the young
farmer. “Right now those boys are a lot more scared of us
than we are of them.”
On an Arizona highway, a two-car caravan is flashing
across sagebrush country—the mesa country of hawks and
rattlesnakes and towering red rocks. Dewey is driving the
lead car, Perry Smith sits beside him, and Duntz is sitting in
the back seat. Smith is handcuffed, and the handcuffs are
attached to a security belt by a short length of chain—an
arrangement so restricting his movements that he cannot
smoke unaided. When he wants a cigarette, Dewey must
light it for him and place it between his lips, a task that the
detective finds “repellent,” for it seems such an intimate
action—the kind of thing he’d done while he was courting
his wife.
On the whole, the prisoner ignores his guardians and their
sporadic attempts to goad him by repeating parts of
Hickock’s hour-long tape-recorded confession: “He says he
tried to stop you, Perry. But says he couldn’t. Says he was
scared you’d shoot him too,” and “Yes, sir, Perry. It’s all
your fault. Hickock himself, he says he wouldn’t harm the
fleas on a dog.” None of this—outwardly, at any rate—
agitates Smith. He continues to contemplate the scenery, to
read Burma-Shave doggerel, and to count the carcasses of
shotgunned coyotes festooning ranch fences.
Dewey, not anticipating any exceptional response, says,
“Hickock tells us you’re a natural-born killer. Says it doesn’t
bother you a bit. Says one time out there in Las Vegas you
went after a colored man with a bicycle chain. Whipped him
to death. For fun.”
To Dewey’s surprise, the prisoner gasps. He twists around
in his seat until he can see, through the rear window, the
motorcade’s second car, see inside it: “The tough boy!”
Turning back, he stares at the dark streak of desert
highway. “Ithought it was a stunt. Ididn’t believe you. That
Dick let fly. The tough boy! Oh, a real brass boy. Wouldn’t
harm the fleas on a dog. Just run over the dog.” He spits. “I
never killed any nigger.” Duntz agrees with him; having
studied the files on unsolved Las Vegas homicides, he
knows Smith to be innocent of this particular deed. “Inever
killed any niggers. But he thought so. Ialways knew if we
ever got caught, if Dick ever really let fly, dropped his guts
all over the goddam floor—Iknew he’d tell about the
nigger.” He spits again. “So Dick was afraid of me? That’s
amusing. I’m very amused. What he don’t know is, Ialmost
did shoot him.”
Dewey lights two cigarettes, one for himself, one for the
prisoner. “Tell us about it, Perry.”
Smith smokes with closed eyes, and explains, “I’m thinking.
Iwant to remember this just the way it was.” He pauses for
quite a while. “Well, it all started with a letter Igot while I
was out in Buhl, Idaho. That was September or October.
The letter was from Dick, and he said he was on to a cinch.
The perfect score. Ididn’t answer him, but he wrote again,
urging me to come back to Kansas and go partners with
him. He never said what kind of score it was. Just that it
was a ‘sure-fire cinch.’ Now, as it happened, Ihad another
reason for wanting to be in Kansas around about that time.
A personal matter I’d just as soon keep to myself—it’s got
nothing to do with this deal. Only that otherwise Iwouldn’t
have gone back there. But Idid. And Dick met me at the
bus station in Kansas City. We drove out to the farm, his
parents’ place. But they didn’t want me there. I’m very
sensitive; Iusually know what people are feeling.
“Like you.” He means Dewey, but does not look at him.
“You hate handing me a butt. That’s your business. Idon’t
blame you. Any more than IbLarned Dick’s mother. The
fact is, she’s a very sweet person. But she knew what Iwas
—a friend from The Walls—and she didn’t want me in her
house. Christ, Iwas glad to get out, go to a hotel. Dick took
me to a hotel in Olathe. We bought some beer and carried
it up to the room, and that’s when Dick outlined what he had
in mind. He said after I’d left Lansing he celled with
someone who’d once worked for a wealthy wheat grower
out in western Kansas. Mr. Clutter. Dick drew me a
diagram of the Clutter house. He knew where everything
was—doors, halls, bedrooms. He said one of the ground-
floor rooms was used as an office, and in the office there
was a safe—a wall safe. He said Mr. Clutter needed it
because he always kept on hand large sums of cash. Never
less than ten thousand dollars. The plan was to rob the
safe, and if we were seen—well, whoever saw us would
have to go. Dick must have said it a million times: ‘No
witnesses.’ ”
Dewey says, “How many of these witnesses did he think
there might be? Imean, how many people did he expect to
find in the Clutter house?”
“That’s what Iwanted to know. But he wasn’t sure. At least
four. Probably six. And it was possible the family might
have guests. He thought we ought to be ready to handle up
to a dozen.”
Dewey groans, Duntz whistles, and Smith, smiling wanly,
adds, “Me, too. Seemed to me that was a little off. Twelve
people. But Dick said it was a cinch. He said, ‘We’re
gonna go in there and splatter those walls with hair.’ The
mood Iwas in, Ilet myself be carried along. But also—I’ll be
honest—Ihad faith in Dick; he struck me as being very
practical, the masculine type, and Iwanted the money as
much as he did. Iwanted to get it and go to Mexico. But I
hoped we could do it without violence. Seemed to me we
could if we wore masks. We argued about it. On the way
out there, out to Holcomb, Iwanted to stop and buy some
black silk stockings to wear over our heads. But Dick felt
that even with a stocking he could still be identified.
Because of his bad eye. All the same, when we got to
Emporia—”
Duntz says, “Hold on, Perry. You’re jumping ahead. Go
back to Olathe. What time did you leave there?”
“One. One-thirty. We left just after lunch and drove to
Emporia. Where we bought some rubber gloves and a roll
of cord. The knife and shotgun, the shells—Dick had
brought all that from home. But he didn’t want to look for
black stockings. It got to be quite an argument. Somewhere
on the outskirts of Emporia, we passed a Catholic hospital,
and Ipersuaded him to stop and go inside and try and buy
some black stockings from the nuns. Iknew nuns wear
them. But he only made believe. Came out and said they
wouldn’t sell him any. Iwas sure he hadn’t even asked, and
he confessed it; he said it was a puky idea—the nuns
would’ve thought he was crazy. So we didn’t stop again till
Great Bend. That’s where we bought the tape. Had dinner
there, a big dinner. It put me to sleep. When Iwoke up, we
were just coming into Garden City. Seemed like a real
dead-dog town. We stopped for gas at a filling station—”
Dewey asks if he remembers which one.
“Believe it was a Phillips 66.”
“What time was this?”
“Around midnight. Dick said it was seven miles more to
Holcomb. All the rest of the way, he kept talking to himself,
saying this ought to be here and that ought to be there—
according to the instructions he’d memorized. Ihardly
realized it when we went through Holcomb, it was such a
little settlement. We crossed a railroad track. Suddenly
Dick said, ‘This is it, this has to be it.’ It was the entrance to
a private road, lined with trees. We slowed down and
turned off the lights. Didn’t need them. Account of the moon.
There wasn’t nothing else up there—not a cloud, nothing.
Just that full moon. It was like broad day, and when we
started up the road, Dick said, ‘Look at this spread! The
barns! That house! Don’t tell me this guy ain’t loaded.’ But I
didn’t like the setup, the atmosphere; it was sort of too
impressive. We parked in the shadows of a tree. While we
were sitting there, a light came on—not in the main house
but a house maybe a hundred yards to the left. Dick said it
was the hired man’s house; he knew because of the
diagram. But he said it was a damn sight nearer the Clutter
house than it was supposed to be. Then the light went off.
Mr. Dewey—the witness you mentioned. Is that who you
meant—the hired man?”
“No. He never heard a sound. But his wife was nursing a
sick baby. He said they were up and down the whole night.”
“A sick baby. Well, Iwondered. While we were still sitting
there, it happened again—a light flashed on and off. And
that really put bubbles in my blood. Itold Dick to count me
out. If he was determined to go ahead with it, he’d have to
do it alone. He started the car, we were leaving, and I
thought, Bless Jesus. I’ve always trusted my intuitions;
they’ve saved my life more than once. But halfway down the
road Dick stopped. He was sore as hell. Icould see he was
thinking, Here I’ve set up this big score, here we’ve come
all this way, and now this punk wants to chicken out. He
said, ‘Maybe you think Iain’t got the guts to do it alone. But,
by God, I’ll show you who’s got guts.’ There was some
liquor in the car. We each had a drink, and Itold him, ‘O.K.,
Dick. I’m with you.’ So we turned back. Parked where we
had before. In the shadows of a tree. Dick put on gloves; I’d
already put on mine. He carried the knife and a flashlight. I
had the gun. The house looked tremendous in the
moonlight. Looked empty. Iremember hoping there was
nobody home—”
Dewey says, “But you saw a dog?”
“No.”
“The family had an old gun-shy dog. We couldn’t
understand why he didn’t bark. Unless he’d seen a gun and
bolted.”
“Well, Ididn’t see anything or nobody. That’s why Inever
believed it. About an eyewitness.”
“Not eyewitness. Witness. Someone whose testimony
associates you and Hickock with this case.”
“Oh. Uh-huh. Uh-huh. Him. And Dick always said he’d be
too scared. Ha!”
Duntz, not to be diverted, reminds him, “Hickock had the
knife. You had the gun. How did you get into the house?”
“The door was unlocked. A side door. It took us into Mr.
Clutter’s office. Then we waited in the dark. Listening. But
the only sound was the wind. There was quite a little wind
outside. It made the trees move, and you could hear the
leaves. The one window was curtained with Venetian
blinds, but moonlight was coming through. Iclosed the
blinds, and Dick turned on his flashlight. We saw the desk.
The safe was supposed to be in the wall directly behind the
desk, but we couldn’t find it. It was a paneled wall, and there
were books and framed maps, and Inoticed, on a shelf, a
terrific pair of binoculars. Idecided Iwas going to take
them with me when we left there.”
“Did you?” asks Dewey, for the binoculars had not been
missed.
Smith nods. “We sold them in Mexico.”
“Sorry. Go on.”
“Well, when we couldn’t find the safe, Dick doused the
flashlight and we moved in darkness out of the office and
across a parlor, a living room. Dick whispered to me
couldn’t Iwalk quieter. But he was just as bad. Every step
we took made a racket. We came to a hall and a door, and
Dick, remembering the diagram, said it was a bedroom.
He shined the flashlight and opened the door. A man said,
‘Honey?’ He’d been asleep, and he blinked and said, ‘Is
that you, honey?’ Dick asked him, ‘Are you Mr. Clutter?’ He
was wide awake now; he sat up and said, ‘Who is it? What
do you want?’ Dick told him, very polite, like we were a
couple of door-to-door salesmen, ‘We want to talk to you,
sir. In your office, please.’ And Mr. Clutter, barefoot, just
wearing pajamas, he went with us to the office and we
turned on the office lights.
“Up till then he hadn’t been able to see us very good. Ithink
what he saw hit him hard. Dick says, ‘Now, sir, all we want
you to do is show us where you keep that safe.’ But Mr.
Clutter says, ‘What safe?’ He says he don’t have any safe. I
knew right then it was true. He had that kind of face. You
just knew whatever he told you was pretty much the truth.
But Dick shouted at him, ‘Don’t lie to me, you sonofabitch! I
know goddam well you got a safe!’ My feeling was nobody
had ever spoken to Mr. Clutter like that. But he looked Dick
straight in the eye and told him, being very mild about it—
said, well, he was sorry but he just didn’t have any safe.
Dick tapped him on the chest with the knife, says, ‘Show us
where that safe is or you’re gonna be a good bit sorrier.’
But Mr. Clutter—oh, you could see he was scared, but his
voice stayed mild and steady—he went on denying he had
a safe.
“Sometime along in there, Ifixed the telephone. The one in
the office. Iripped out the wires. And Iasked Mr. Clutter if
there were any other telephones in the house. He said yes,
there was one in the kitchen. So Itook the flashlight and
went to the kitchen—it was quite a distance from the office.
When Ifound the telephone, Iremoved the receiver and cut
the line with a pair of pliers. Then, heading back, Iheard a
noise. A creaking overhead. Istopped at the foot of the
stairs leading to the second floor. It was dark, and Ididn’t
dare use the flashlight. But Icould tell there was someone
there. At the top of the stairs, silhouetted against a window.
A figure. Then it moved away.”
Dewey imagines it must have been Nancy. He’d often
theorized, on the basis of the gold wristwatch found tucked
in the toe of a shoe in her closet, that Nancy had awakened,
heard persons in the house, thought they might be thieves,
and prudently hidden the watch, her most valuable property.
“For all Iknew, maybe it was somebody with a gun. But
Dick wouldn’t even listen to me. He was so busy playing
tough boy. Bossing Mr. Clutter around. Now he’d brought
him back to the bedroom. He was counting the money in
Mr. Clutter’s billfold. There was about thirty dollars. He
threw the billfold on the bed and told him, ‘You’ve got more
money in this house than that. A rich man like you. Living on
a spread like this.’ Mr. Clutter said that was all the cash he
had, and explained he always did business by check. He
offered to write us a check. Dick just blew up—‘What kind
of Mongolians do you think we are?’—and Ithought Dick
was ready to smash him, so Isaid, ‘Dick. Listen to me.
There’s somebody awake upstairs.’ Mr. Clutter told us the
only people upstairs were his wife and a son and daughter.
Dick wanted to know if the wife had any money, and Mr.
Clutter said if she did, it would be very little, a few dollars,
and he asked us—really kind of broke down—please not to
bother her, because she was an invalid, she’d been very ill
for a long time. But Dick insisted on going upstairs. He
made Mr. Clutter lead the way.
“At the foot of the stairs, Mr. Clutter switched on lights that
lighted the hall above, and as we were going up, he said, ‘I
don’t know why you boys want to do this. I’ve never done
you any harm. Inever saw you before.’ That’s when Dick
told him, ‘Shut up! When we want you to talk, we’ll tell you.’
Wasn’t anybody in the upstairs hall, and all the doors were
shut. Mr. Clutter pointed out the rooms where the boy and
girl were supposed to be sleeping, then opened his wife’s
door. He lighted a lamp beside the bed and told her, ‘It’s all
right, sweetheart. Don’t be afraid. These men, they just
want some money.’ She was a thin, frail sort of woman in a
long white nightgown. The minute she opened her eyes,
she started to cry. She says, talking to her husband,
‘Sweetheart, Idon’t have any money.’ He was holding her
hand, patting it. He said, ‘Now, don’t cry, honey. It’s nothing
to be afraid of. It’s just Igave these men all the money Ihad,
but they want some more. They believe we have a safe
somewhere in the house. Itold them we don’t.’ Dick raised
his hand, like he was going to crack him across the mouth.
Says, ‘Didn’t Itell you to shut up?’ Mrs. Clutter said, ‘But my
husband’s telling you the God’s truth. There isn’t any safe.’
And Dick answers back, ‘Iknow goddam well you got a
safe. And I’ll find it before Ileave here. Needn’t worry that I
won’t.’ Then he asked her where she kept her purse. The
purse was in a bureau drawer. Dick turned it inside out.
Found just some change and a dollar or two. Imotioned to
him to come into the hall. Iwanted to discuss the situation.
So we stepped outside, and Isaid—”
Duntz interrupts him to ask if Mr. and Mrs. Clutter could
overhear the conversation.
“No. We were just outside the door, where we could keep
an eye on them. But we were whispering. Itold Dick, ‘These
people are telling the truth. The one who lied is your friend
Floyd Wells. There isn’t any safe, so let’s get the hell out of
here.’ But Dick was too ashamed to face it. He said he
wouldn’t believe it till we searched the whole house. He
said the thing to do was tie them all up, then take our time
looking around. You couldn’t argue with him, he was so
excited. The glory of having everybody at his mercy, that’s
what excited him. Well, there was a bathroom next door to
Mrs. Clutter’s room. The idea was to lock the parents in the
bathroom, and wake the kids and put them there, then bring
them out one by one and tie them up in different parts of the
house. And then, says Dick, after we’ve found the safe,
we’ll cut their throats. Can’t shoot them, he says—that
would make too much noise.”
Perry frowns, rubs his knees with his manacled hands. “Let
me think a minute. Because along in here things begin to
get a little complicated. Iremember. Yes. Yes, Itook a chair
out of the hall and stuck it in the bathroom. So Mrs. Clutter
could sit down. Seeing she was said to be an invalid. When
we locked them up, Mrs. Clutter was crying and telling us,
‘Please don’t hurt anybody. Please don’t hurt my children.’
And her husband had his arms around her, saying, like,
‘Sweetheart, these fellows don’t mean to hurt anybody. All
they want is some money.’
“We went to the boy’s room. He was awake. Lying there
like he was too scared to move. Dick told him to get up, but
he didn’t move, or move fast enough, so Dick punched him,
pulled him out of bed, and Isaid, ‘You don’t have to hit him,
Dick.’ And Itold the boy—he was only wearing a T-shirt—to
put on his pants. He put on a pair of blue jeans, and we’d
just locked him in the bathroom when the girl appeared—
came out of her room. She was all dressed, like she’d been
awake some while. Imean, she had on socks and slippers,
and a kimono, and her hair was wrapped in a bandanna.
She was trying to smile. She said, ‘Good grief, what is this?
Some kind of joke?’ Idon’t guess she thought it was much
of a joke, though. Not after Dick opened the bathroom door
and shoved her in . . .”
Dewey envisions them: the captive family, meek and
frightened but without any premonition of their destiny. Herb
couldn’t have suspected, or he would have fought. He was
a gentle man but strong and no coward. Herb, his friend
Alvin Dewey felt certain, would have fought to the death
defending Bonnie’s life and the lives of his children.
“Dick stood guard outside the bathroom door while I
reconnoitered. Ifrisked the girl’s room, and Ifound a little
purse-like a doll’s purse. Inside it was a silver dollar. I
dropped it somehow, and it rolled across the floor. Rolled
under a chair. Ihad to get down on my knees. And just then
it was like Iwas outside myself. Watching myself in some
nutty movie. It made me sick. Iwas just disgusted. Dick,
and all his talk about a rich man’s safe, and here Iam
crawling on my belly to steal a child’s silver dollar. One
dollar. And I’m crawling on my belly to get it.”
Perry squeezes his knees, asks the detectives for aspirin,
thanks Duntz for giving him one, chews it, and resumes
talking. “But that’s what you do. You get what you can. I
frisked the boy’s room, too. Not a dime. But there was a
little portable radio, and Idecided to take it. Then I
remembered the binoculars I’d seen in Mr. Clutter’s office. I
went downstairs to get them. Icarried the binoculars and
the radio out to the car. It was cold, and the wind and the
cold felt good. The moon was so bright you could see for
miles. And Ithought, Why don’t Iwalk off? Walk to the
highway, hitch a ride. Isure Jesus didn’t want to go back in
that house. And yet—How can Iexplain this? It was like I
wasn’t part of it. More as though Iwas reading a story. And I
had to know what was going to happen. The end. So Iwent
back upstairs. And now, let’s see—uh-huh, that’s when we
tied them up. Mr. Clutter first. We called him out of the
bathroom, and Itied his hands together. Then Imarched
him all the way down to the basement—”
Dewey says, “Alone and unarmed?”
“Ihad the knife.”
Dewey says, “But Hickock stayed guard upstairs?”
“To keep them quiet. Anyway, Ididn’t need help. I’ve
worked with rope all my life.”
Dewey says, “Were you using the flashlight or did you turn
on the basement lights?”
“The lights. The basement was divided into two sections.
One part seemed to be a playroom. Took him to the other
section, the furnace room. Isaw a big cardboard box
leaning against the wall. A mattress box. Well, Ididn’t feel I
ought to ask him to stretch out on the cold floor, so I
dragged the mattress box over, flattened it, and told him to
lie down.”
The driver, via the rear-view mirror, glances at his
colleague, attracts his eye, and Duntz slightly nods, as if in
tribute. All along Dewey had argued that the mattress box
had been placed on the floor for the comfort of Mr. Clutter,
and taking heed of similar hints, other fragmentary
indications of ironic, erratic compassion, the detective had
conjectured that at least one of the killers was not
altogether uncharitable.
“Itied his feet, then tied his hands to his feet. Iasked him
was it too tight, and he said no, but said would we please
leave his wife alone. There was no need to tie her up—she
wasn’t going to holler or try to run out of the house. He said
she’d been sick for years and years, and she was just
beginning to get a little better, but an incident like this might
cause her to have a setback. Iknow it’s nothing to laugh
over, only Icouldn’t help it—him talking about a ‘setback.’
“Next thing, Ibrought the boy down. First Iput him in the
room with his dad. Tied his hands to an overhead
steampipe. Then Ifigured that wasn’t very safe. He might
somehow get loose and undo the old man, or vice versa.
So Icut him down and took him to the playroom, where
there was a comfortable-looking couch. Iroped his feet to
the foot of the couch, roped his hands, then carried the rope
up and made a loop around his neck, so if he struggled
he’d choke himself. Once, while Iwas working, Iput the
knife down on this—well, it was a freshly varnished cedar
chest; the whole cellar smelled of varnish—and he asked
me not to put my knife there. The chest was a wedding
present he’d built for somebody. A sister, Ibelieve he said.
Just as Iwas leaving, he had a coughing fit, so Istuffed a
pillow under his head. Then Iturned off the lights—”
Dewey says, “But you hadn’t taped their mouths?”
“No. The taping came later, after I’d tied both the women in
their bedrooms. Mrs. Clutter was still crying, at the same
time she was asking me about Dick. She didn’t trust him,
but said she felt Iwas a decent young man. I’m sure you
are, she says, and made me promise Iwouldn’t let Dick
hurt anybody. Ithink what she really had in mind was her
daughter. Iwas worried about that myself. Isuspected Dick
was plotting something, something Iwouldn’t stand for.
When Ifinished tying Mrs. Clutter, sure enough, Ifound he’d
taken the girl to her bedroom. She was in the bed, and he
was sitting on the edge of it talking to her. Istopped that; I
told him to go look for the safe while Itied her up. After he’d
gone, Iroped her feet together and tied her hands behind
her back. Then Ipulled up the covers, tucked her in till just
her head showed. There was a little easy chair near the
bed, and Ithought I’d rest a minute; my legs were on fire—
all that climbing and kneeling. Iasked Nancy if she had a
boy friend. She said yes, she did. She was trying hard to
act casual and friendly. Ireally liked her. She was really
nice. A very pretty girl, and not spoiled or anything. She told
me quite a lot about herself. About school, and how she
was going to go to a university to study music and art.
Horses. Said next to dancing what she liked best was to
gallop a horse, so Imentioned my mother had been a
champion rodeo rider.
“And we talked about Dick; Iwas curious, see, what he’d
been saying to her. Seems she’d asked him why he did
things like this. Rob people. And, wow, did he toss her a
tearjerker—said he’d been raised an orphan in an
orphanage, and how nobody had ever loved him, and his
only relative was a sister who lived with men without
marrying them. All the time we were talking, we could hear
the lunatic roaming around below, looking for the safe.
Looking behind pictures. Tapping the walls. Tap tap tap.
Like some nutty woodpecker. When he came back, just to
be a real bastard Iasked had he found it. Course he hadn’t,
but he said he’d come across another purse in the kitchen.
With seven dollars.”
Duntz says, “How long now had you been in the house?”
“Maybe an hour.”
Duntz says, “And when did you do the taping?”
“Right then. Started with Mrs. Clutter. Imade Dick help me
—because Ididn’t want to leave him alone with the girl. Icut
the tape in long strips, and Dick wrapped them around Mrs.
Clutter’s head like you’d wrap a mummy. He asked her,
‘How come you keep on crying? Nobody’s hurting you,’ and
he turned off the bedside lamp and said, ‘Good night, Mrs.
Clutter. Go to sleep.’ Then he says to me, as we’re heading
along the hail toward Nancy’s room, ‘I’m gonna bust that
little girl.’ And Isaid, ‘Uh-huh. But you’ll have to kill me first.’
He looked like he didn’t believe he’d heard right. He says,
‘What do you care? Hell, you can bust her, too.’ Now, that’s
something Idespise. Anybody that can’t control themselves
sexually. Christ, Ihate that kind of stuff. Itold him straight,
‘Leave her alone. Else you’ve got a buzzsaw to fight.’ That
really burned him, but he realized it wasn’t the time to have
a flat-out free-for-all. So he says, ‘O.K., honey. If that’s the
way you feel.’ The end of it was we never even taped her.
We switched off the hall light and went down to the
basement.”
Perry hesitates. He has a question but phrases it as a
statement: “I’ll bet he never said anything about wanting to
rape the girl.”
Dewey admits it, but he adds that except for an apparently
somewhat expurgated version of his own conduct,
Hickock’s story supports Smith’s. The details vary, the
dialogue is not identical, but in substance the two accounts
—thus far, at least—corroborate one another.
“Maybe. But Iknew he hadn’t told about the girl. I’d have bet
my shirt.”
Duntz says, “Perry, I’ve been keeping track of the lights.
The way Icalculate it, when you turned off the upstairs light,
that left the house completely dark.”
“Did. And we never used the lights again. Except the
flashlight. Dick carried the flashlight when we went to tape
Mr. Clutter and the boy. Just before Itaped him, Mr. Clutter
asked me—and these were his last words—wanted to
know how his wife was, if she was all right, and Isaid she
was fine, she was ready to go to sleep, and Itold him it
wasn’t long till morning, and how in the morning somebody
would find them, and then all of it, me and Dick and all,
would seem like something they dreamed. Iwasn’t kidding
him. Ididn’t want to harm the man. Ithought he was a very
nice gentleman. Soft-spoken. Ithought so right up to the
moment Icut his throat.
“Wait. I’m not telling it the way it was.” Perry scowls. He
rubs his legs; the handcuffs rattle. “After, see, after we’d
taped them, Dick and Iwent off in a corner. To talk it over.
Remember, now, there were hard feelings between us. Just
then it made my stomach turn to think I’d ever admired him,
lapped up all that brag. Isaid, ‘Well, Dick. Any qualms?’ He
didn’t answer me. Isaid, ‘Leave them alive, and this won’t
be any small rap. Ten years the very least.’ He still didn’t
say anything. He was holding the knife. Iasked him for it,
and he gave it to me, and Isaid, ‘All right, Dick. Here goes.’
But Ididn’t mean it. Imeant to call his bluff, make him argue
me out of it, make him admit he was a phony and a coward.
See, it was something between me and Dick. Iknelt down
beside Mr. Clutter, and the pain of kneeling—Ithought of
that goddam dollar. Silver dollar. The shame. Disgust. And
they’d told me never to come back to Kansas. But Ididn’t
realize what I’d done till Iheard the sound. Like somebody
drowning. Screaming under water. Ihanded the knife to
Dick. Isaid, ‘Finish him. You’ll feel better.’ Dick tried—or
pretended to. But the man had the strength of ten men—he
was half out of his ropes, his hands were free. Dick
panicked. Dick wanted to get the hell out of there. But I
wouldn’t let him go. The man would have died anyway, I
know that, but Icouldn’t leave him like he was. Itold Dick to
hold the flashlight, focus it. Then Iaimed the gun. The room
just exploded. Went blue. Just blazed up. Jesus, I’ll never
understand why they didn’t hear the noise twenty miles
around.”
Dewey’s ears ring with it—a ringing that almost deafens
him to the whispery rush of Smith’s soft voice. But the voice
plunges on, ejecting a fusillade of sounds and images:
Hickock hunting the discharged shell; hurrying, hurrying,
and Kenyon’s head in a circle of light, the murmur of muffled
pleadings, then Hickock again scrambling after a used
cartridge; Nancy’s room, Nancy listening to boots on
hardwood stairs, the creak of the steps as they climb
toward her, Nancy’s eyes, Nancy watching the flashlight’s
shine seek the target (“She said, ‘Oh, no! Oh, please. No!
No! No! No! Don’t! Oh, please don’t! Please!’ Igave the
gun to Dick. Itold him I’d done all Icould do. He took aim,
and she turned her face to the wall”); the dark hall, the
assassins hastening toward the final door. Perhaps, having
heard all she had, Bonnie welcomed their swift approach.
“That last shell was a bitch to locate. Dick wiggled under
the bed to get it. Then we closed Mrs. Clutter’s door and
went downstairs to the office. We waited there, like we had
when we first came. Looked through the blinds to see if the
hired man was poking around, or anybody else who might
have heard the gunfire. But it was just the same—not a
sound. Just the wind—and Dick panting like wolves were
after him. Right there, in those few seconds before we ran
out to the car and drove away, that’s when Idecided I’d
better shoot Dick. He’d said over and over, he’d drummed
it into me: No witnesses. And Ithought, He’s a witness. I
don’t know what stopped me. God knows Ishould’ve done
it. Shot him dead. Got in the car and kept on going till Ilost
myself in Mexico.”
A hush. For ten miles and more, the three men ride without
speaking.
Sorrow and profound fatigue are at the heart of Dewey’s
silence. It had been his ambition to learn “exactly what
happened in that house that night.” Twice now he’d been
told, and the two versions were very much alike, the only
serious discrepancy being that Hickock attributed all four
deaths to Smith, while Smith contended that Hickock had
killed the two women. But the confessions, though they
answered questions of how and why, failed to satisfy his
sense of meaningful design. The crime was a
psychological accident, virtually an impersonal act; the
victims might as well have been killed by lightning. Except
for one thing: they had experienced prolonged terror, they
had suffered. And Dewey could not forget their sufferings.
Nonetheless, he found it possible to look at the man beside
him without anger—with, rather, a measure of sympathy—
for Perry Smith’s life had been no bed of roses but pitiful,
an ugly and lonely progress toward one mirage and then
another. Dewey’s sympathy, however, was not deep
enough to accommodate either forgiveness or mercy. He
hoped to see Perry and his partner hanged—hanged back
to back.
Duntz asks Smith, “Added up, how much money did you get
from the Clutters?”
“Between forty and fifty dollars.”
Among Garden City’s animals are two gray tomcats who
are always together—thin, dirty strays with strange and
clever habits. The chief ceremony of their day is performed
at twilight. First they trot the length of Main Street, stopping
to scrutinize the engine grilles of parked automobiles,
particularly those stationed in front of the two hotels, the
Windsor and Warren, for these cars, usually the property of
travelers from afar, often yield what the bony, methodical
creatures are hunting: slaughtered birds—crows,
chickadees, and sparrows foolhardy enough to have flown
into the path of oncoming motorists. Using their paws as
though they are surgical instruments, the cats extract from
the grilles every feathery particle. Having cruised Main
Street, they invariably turn the corner at Main and Grant,
then lope along toward Courthouse Square, another of their
hunting grounds—and a highly promising one on the
afternoon of Wednesday, January 6, for the area swarmed
with Finney County vehicles that had brought to town part of
the crowd populating the square.
The crowd started forming at four o’clock, the hour that the
county attorney had given as the probable arrival time of
Hickock and Smith. Since the announcement of Hickock’s
confession on Sunday evening, newsmen of every style had
assembled in Garden City: representatives of the major
wire services, photographers, newsreel and television
cameramen, reporters from Missouri, Nebraska,
Oklahoma, Texas, and, of course, all the principal Kansas
papers—twenty or twenty-five men altogether. Many of
them had been waiting three days without much to do
except interview the service-station attendant James Spor,
who, after seeing published photographs of the accused
killers, had identified them as customers to whom he’d sold
three dollars and six cents’ worth of gas the night of the
Holcomb tragedy.
It was the return of Hickock and Smith that these
professional spectators were on hand to record, and
Captain Gerald Murray, of the Highway Patrol, had
reserved for them ample space on the sidewalk fronting the
courthouse steps—the steps the prisoners must mount on
their way to the county jail, an institution that occupies the
top floor of the four-story limestone structure. One reporter,
Richard Parr, of the Kansas City Star, had obtained a copy
of Monday’s Las Vegas Sun. The paper’s headline raised
rounds of laughter: FEAR LYNCH MOB AWAITING RETURNOF KILLER
SUSPECTS. Captain Murray remarked, “Don’t look much like
a necktie party to me.”
Indeed, the congregation in the square might have been
expecting a parade, or attending a political rally. High-
school students, among them former classmates of Nancy
and Kenyon Clutter, chanted cheerleader rhymes, bubbled
bubble gum, gobbled hot dogs and soda pop. Mothers
soothed wailing babies. Men strode about with young
children perched on their shoulders. The Boy Scouts were
present—an entire troop. And the middle-aged
membership of a women’s bridge club arrived en masse.
Mr. J. P. (Jap) Adams, head of the local Veterans
Commission office, appeared, attired in a tweed garment
so oddly tailored that a friend yelled, “Hey, Jap! What ya
doin’ wearin’ ladies’ clothes?”—for Mr. Adams, in his haste
to reach the scene, had unwittingly donned his secretary’s
coat. A roving radio reporter interviewed sundry other
townsfolk, asking them what, in their opinion, the proper
retribution would be for “the doers of such a dastardly
deed,” and while most of his subjects said gosh or gee
whiz, one student replied, “Ithink they ought to be locked in
the same cell for the rest of their lives. Never allowed any
visitors. Just sit there staring at each other till the day they
die.” And a tough, strutty little man said, “Ibelieve in capital
punishment. It’s like the Bible says—an eye for an eye. And
even so we’re two pair short!”
As long as the sun lasted, the day had been dry and warm
—October weather in January. But when the sun
descended, when the shadows of the square’s giant shade
trees met and combined, the coldness as well as darkness
numbed the crowd. Numbed and pruned it; by six o’clock,
fewer than three hundred persons remained. Newsmen,
cursing the undue delay, stamped their feet and slapped
frozen ears with ungloved, freezing hands. Suddenly, a
murmuring arose on the south side of the square. The cars
were coming.
Although none of the journalists anticipated violence,
several had predicted shouted abuse. But when the crowd
caught sight of the murderers, with their escort of blue-
coated highway patrolmen, it fell silent, as though amazed
to find them humanly shaped. The handcuffed men, white-
faced and blinking blindly, glistened in the glare of
flashbulbs and floodlights. The cameramen, pursuing the
prisoners and the police into the courthouse and up three
flights of stairs, photographed the door of the county jail
slamming shut.
No one lingered, neither the press corps nor any of the
townspeople. Warm rooms and warm suppers beckoned
them, and as they hurried away, leaving the cold square to
the two gray cats, the miraculous autumn departed too; the
year’s first snow began to fall.
IV
THE CORNER
Institutional dourness and cheerful domesticity coexist on
the fourth floor of the Finney County Courthouse. The
presence of the county jail supplies the first quality, while
the so-called Sheriff’s Residence, a pleasant apartment
separated from the jail proper by steel doors and a short
corridor, accounts for the second.
In January, 1960, the Sheriff’s Residence was not in fact
occupied by the sheriff, Earl Robinson, but by the
undersheriff and his wife, Wendle and Josephine (“Josie”)
Meier. The Meiers, who had been married more than
twenty years, were very much alike: tall people with weight
and strength to spare, with wide hands, square and calm
and kindly faces—the last being most true of Mrs. Meier, a
direct and practical woman who nevertheless seems
illuminated by a mystical serenity. As the undersheriff’s
helpmate her hours are long; between five in the morning,
when she begins the day by reading a chapter in the Bible,
and 10:00 P.M., her bedtime, she cooks and sews for the
prisoners, darns, does their laundry, takes splendid care of
her husband, and looks after their five-room apartment, with
its gemütlich mélange of plump hassocks and squashy
chairs and cream-colored lace window curtains. The
Meiers have a daughter, an only child, who is married and
lives in Kansas City, so the couple live alone—or, as Mrs.
Meier more correctly puts it: “Alone except for whoever
happens to be in the ladies’ cell.”
The jail contains six cells; the sixth, the one reserved for
female prisoners, is actually an isolated unit situated inside
the Sheriff’s Residence—indeed, it adjoins the Meiers’
kitchen. “But,” says Josie Meier, “that don’t worry me. I
enjoy the company. Having somebody to talk to while I’m
doing my kitchen work. Most of these women, you got to
feel sorry for them. Just met up with Old Man Trouble is all.
Course Hickock and Smith was a different matter. Far as I
know, Perry Smith was the first man ever stayed in the
ladies’ cell. The reason was, the sheriff wanted to keep him
and Hickock separated from each other until after their trial.
The afternoon they brought them in, Imade six apple pies
and baked some bread and all the while kept track of the
goings-on down there on the Square. My kitchen window
overlooks the Square; you couldn’t want a better view. I’m
no judge of crowds, but I’d guess there were several
hundred people waiting to see the boys that killed the
Clutter family. Inever met any of the Clutters myself, but
from everything I’ve ever heard about them they must have
been very fine people. What happened to them is hard to
forgive, and Iknow Wendle was worried how the crowd
might act when they caught sight of Hickock and Smith. He
was afraid somebody might try to get at them. So Ikind of
had my heart in my mouth when Isaw the cars arrive, saw
the reporters, all the newspaper fellows running and
pushing; but by then it was dark, after six, and bitter cold—
more than half the crowd had given up and gone home. The
ones that stayed, they didn’t say boo. Only stared.
“Later, when they brought the boys upstairs, the first one I
saw was Hickock. He had on light summer pants and just
an old cloth shirt. Surprised he didn’t catch pneumonia,
considering how cold it was. But he looked sick all right.
White as a ghost. Well, it must be a terrible experience—to
be stared at by a horde of strangers, to have to walk among
them, and them knowing who you are and what you did.
Then they brought up Smith. Ihad some supper ready to
serve them in their cells, hot soup and coffee and some
sandwiches and pie. Ordinarily, we feed just twice a day.
Breakfast at seven-thirty, and at four-thirty we serve the
main meal. But Ididn’t want those fellows going to bed on
an empty stomach; seemed to me they must be feeling bad
enough without that. But when Itook Smith his supper,
carried it in on a tray, he said he wasn’t hungry. He was
looking out the window of the ladies’ cell. Standing with his
back to me. That window has the same view as my kitchen
window: trees and the Square and the tops of houses. Itold
him, ‘Just taste the soup, it’s vegetable, and not out of a
can. Imade it myself. The pie, too.’ In about an hour Iwent
back for the tray and he hadn’t touched a crumb. He was
still at the window. Like he hadn’t moved. It was snowing,
and Iremember saying it was the first snow of the year, and
how we’d had such a beautiful long autumn right till then.
And now the snow had come. And then Iasked him if he
had any special dish he liked; if he did I’d try and fix it for
him the next day. He turned round and looked at me.
Suspicious, like Imight be mocking him. Then he said
something about a movie—he had such a quiet way of
speaking, almost a whisper. Wanted to know if Ihad seen a
movie. Iforget the name, anyway Ihadn’t seen it: never
have been much for picture shows. He said this show took
place in Biblical times, and there was a scene where a man
was flung off a balcony, thrown to a mob of men and
women, who tore him to pieces. And he said that was what
came to mind when he saw the crowd on the Square. The
man being torn apart. And the idea that maybe that was
what they might do to him. Said it scared him so bad his
stomach still hurt. Which was why he couldn’t eat. Course
he was wrong, and Itold him so—nobody was going to
harm him, regardless of what he’d done; folks around here
aren’t like that.
“We talked some, he was very shy, but after a while he
said, ‘One thing Ireally like is Spanish rice.’ So Ipromised
to make him some, and he smiled kind of, and Idecided—
well, he wasn’t the worst young man Iever saw. That night,
after I’d gone to bed, Isaid as much to my husband. But
Wendle snorted. Wendle was one of the first on the scene
after the crime was discovered. He said he wished I’d been
out at the Clutter place when they found the bodies. Then I
could’ve judged for myself just how gentle Mr. Smith was.
Him and his friend Hickock. He said they’d cut out your
heart and never bat an eye. There was no denying it—not
with four people dead. And Ilay awake wondering if either
one was bothered by it—the thought of those four graves.”
Amonth passed, and another, and it snowed some part of
almost every day. Snow whitened the wheat-tawny
countryside, heaped the streets of the town, hushed them.
The topmost branches of a snow-laden elm brushed
against the window of the ladies’ cell. Squirrels lived in the
tree, and after weeks of tempting them with leftover
breakfast scraps, Perry lured one off a branch onto the
window sill and through the bars. It was a male squirrel with
auburn fur. He named it Red, and Red soon settled down,
apparently content to share his friend’s captivity. Perry
taught him several tricks: to play with a paper ball, to beg,
to perch on Perry’s shoulder. All this helped to pass time,
but still there were many long hours the prisoner had to
lose. He was not allowed to read newspapers, and he was
bored by the magazines Mrs. Meier lent him: old issues of
Good Housekeeping and McCall’s. But he found things to
do: file his fingernails with an emery board, buff them to a
silky pink sheen; comb and comb his lotion-soaked and
scented hair; brush his teeth three and four times a day;
shave and shower almost as often. And he kept the cell,
which contained a toilet, a shower stall, a cot, a chair, a
table, as neat as his person. He was proud of a compliment
Mrs. Meier had paid him. “Look!” she had said, pointing at
his bunk. “Look at that blanket! You could bounce dimes.”
But it was at the table that he spent most of his waking life;
he ate his meals there, it was where he sat when he
sketched portraits of Red, drew flowers, and the face of
Jesus, and the faces and torsos of imaginary women; and it
was where, on cheap sheets of ruled paper, he made diary-
like notes of day-to-day occurrences.
Thursday 7 January. Dewey here. Brought carton
cigarettes. Also typed copies of Statement for my
signature. I declined.
The “Statement,” a seventy-eight-page document which he
had dictated to the Finney County court stenographer,
recounted admissions already made to Alvin Dewey and
Clarence Duntz. Dewey, speaking of his encounter with
Perry Smith on this particular day, remembered that he had
been very surprised when Perry refused to sign the
statement. “It wasn’t important: Icould always testify in court
as to the oral confession he’d made to Duntz and myself.
And of course Hickock had given us a signed confession
while we were still in Las Vegas—the one in which he
accused Smith of having committed all four murders. But I
was curious. Iasked Perry why he’d changed his mind. And
he said, ‘Everything in my statement is accurate except for
two details. If you’ll let me correct those items then I’ll sign
it.’ Well, Icould guess the items he meant. Because the
only serious difference between his story and Hickock’s
was that he denied having executed the Clutters single-
handed. Until now he’d sworn Hickock killed Nancy and her
mother.
“And Iwas right!—that’s just what he wanted to do: admit
that Hickock had been telling the truth, and that it was he,
Perry Smith, who had shot and killed the whole family. He
said he’d lied about it because, in his words, ‘Iwanted to fix
Dick for being such a coward. Dropping his guts all over
the goddam floor.’ And the reason he’d decided to set the
record straight wasn’t that he suddenly felt any kinder
toward Hickock. According to him he was doing it out of
consideration for Hickock’s parents—said he was sorry for
Dick’s mother. Said, ‘She’s a real sweet person. It might be
some comfort to her to know Dick never pulled the trigger.
None of it would have happened without him, in a way it
was mostly his fault, but the fact remains I’m the one who
killed them.’ But Iwasn’t certain Ibelieved it. Not to the
extent of letting him alter his statement. As Isay, we weren’t
dependent on a formal confession from Smith to prove any
part of our case. With or without it, we had enough to hang
them ten times over.”
Among the elements contributing to Dewey’s confidence
was the recovery of the radio and pair of binoculars the
murderers had stolen from the Clutter house and
subsequently disposed of in Mexico City (where, having
flown there for the purpose, K.B.I. Agent Harold Nye traced
them to a pawnshop). Moreover, Smith, while dictating his
statement, had revealed the whereabouts of other potent
evidence. “We hit the highway and drove east,” he’d said,
in the process of describing what he and Hickock had done
after fleeing the murder scene. “Drove like hell, Dick
driving. Ithink we both felt very high. Idid. Very high, and
very relieved at the same time. Couldn’t stop laughing,
neither one of us; suddenly it all seemed very funny—Idon’t
know why, it just did. But the gun was dripping blood, and
my clothes were stained; there was even blood in my hair.
So we turned off onto a country road, and drove maybe
eight miles till we were way out on the prairie. You could
hear coyotes. We smoked a cigarette, and Dick went on
making jokes about what had happened back there. Igot
out of the car, and siphoned some water out of the water
tank and washed the blood off the gun barrel. Then I
scraped a hole in the ground with Dick’s hunting knife, the
one Iused on Mr. Clutter, and buried in it the empty shells
and all the leftover nylon cord and adhesive tape. After that
we drove till we came to U.S. 83, and headed east toward
Kansas City and Olathe. Around dawn Dick stopped at one
of those picnic places: what they call rest areas—where
they have open fireplaces. We built a fire and burned stuff.
The gloves we’d worn, and my shirt. Dick said he wished
we had an ox to roast; he said he’d never been so hungry. It
was almost noon when we got to Olathe. Dick dropped me
at my hotel, and went on home to have Sunday dinner with
his family. Yes, he took the knife with him. The gun, too.”
K.B.I. agents, dispatched to Hickock’s home, found the
knife inside a fishing-tackle box and the shotgun still
casually propped against a kitchen wall. (Hickock’s father,
who refused to believe his “boy” could have taken part in
such a “horrible crime,” insisted the gun hadn’t been out of
the house since the first week in November, and therefore
could not be the death weapon). As for the empty cartridge
shells, the cord and tape, these were retrieved with the aid
of Virgil Pietz, a county-highway employee, who, working
with a road grader in the area pinpointed by Perry Smith,
shaved away the earth inch by inch until the buried articles
were uncovered. Thus the last loose strings were tied; the
K.B.I. had now assembled an unshakable case, for tests
established that the shells had been discharged by
Hickock’s shotgun, and the remnants of cord and tape were
of a piece with the materials used to bind and silence the
victims.
Monday 11 January. Have a lawyer. Mr. Fleming. Old
man with red tie.
Informed by the defendants that they were without funds to
hire legal counsel, the court, in the person of Judge Roland
H. Tate, appointed as their representatives two local
lawyers, Mr. Arthur Fleming and Mr. Harrison Smith.
Fleming, seventy-one, a former mayor of Garden City, a
short man who enlivens an unsensational appearance with
rather conspicuous neckwear, resisted the assignment. “I
do not desire to serve,” he told the judge. “But if the court
sees fit to appoint me, then of course Ihave no choice.”
Hickock’s attorney, Harrison Smith, forty-five, six feet tall, a
golfer, an Elk of exalted degree, accepted the task with
resigned grace: “Someone has to do it. And I’ll do my best.
Though Idoubt that’ll make me too popular around here.”
Friday 15 January. Mrs. Meier playing radio in her kitchen
and I heard man say the county attorney will seek Death
Penalty. “The rich never hang. Only the poor and
friendless.”
In making his announcement, the county attorney, Duane
West, an ambitious, portly young man of twenty-eight who
looks forty and sometimes fifty, told newsmen, “If the case
goes before a jury, Iwill request the jury, upon finding them
guilty, to sentence them to the death penalty. If the
defendants waive right to jury trial and enter a plea of guilty
before the judge, Iwill request the judge to set the death
penalty. This was a matter Iknew Iwould be called upon to
decide, and my decision has not been arrived at lightly. I
feel that due to the violence of the crime and the apparent
utter lack of mercy shown the victims, the only way the
public can be absolutely protected is to have the death
penalty set against these defendants. This is especially true
since in Kansas there is no such thing as life imprisonment
without possibility of parole. Persons sentenced to life
imprisonment actually serve, on the average, less then
fifteen years.”
Wednesday 20 January. Asked to take lie-detector in
regards to this Walker deal.
A case like the Clutter case, crimes of that magnitude,
arouse the interest of lawmen everywhere, particularly
those investigators burdened with unsolved but similar
crimes, for it is always possible that the solution to one
mystery will solve another. Among the many officers
intrigued by events in Garden City was the sheriff of
Sarasota County, Florida, which includes Osprey, a fishing
settlement not far from Tampa, and the scene, slightly more
than a month after the Clutter tragedy, of the quadruple
slaying on an isolated cattle ranch which Smith had read
about in a Miami newspaper on Christmas Day. The
victims were again four members of a family: a young
couple, Mr. and Mrs. Clifford Walker, and their two children,
a boy and a girl, all of whom had been shot in the head with
a rifle. Since the Clutter murderers had spent the night of
December 19, the date of the murders, in a Tallahassee
hotel, Osprey’s sheriff, who had no other leads whatever,
was understandably anxious to have the two men
questioned and a polygraph examination administered.
Hickock consented to take the test and so did Smith, who
told Kansas authorities, “Iremarked at the time, Isaid to
Dick, I’ll bet whoever did this must be somebody that read
about what happened out here in Kansas. A nut.” The
results of the test, to the dismay of Osprey’s sheriff as well
as Alvin Dewey, who does not believe in exceptional
coincidences, were decisively negative. The murderer of
the Walker family remains unknown.
Sunday 31 January. Dick’s dad here to visit Dick. Said
hello when I sawhim go past [the cell door] but he kept
going. Could be he never heard me. Understand from
Mrs. M [Meier] that Mrs. H [Hickock] didn’t come because
she felt too bad to. Snowing like a bitch. Dreamed last
night I was up in Alaska with Dad—woke up in a puddle of
cold urine!!!
Mr. Hickock spent three hours with his son. Afterward he
walked through the snow to the Garden City depot, a work-
worn old man, stooped and thinned-down by the cancer that
would kill him a few months hence. At the station, while
waiting for a homeward-bound train, he spoke to a reporter:
“Iseen Dick, uh-huh. We had a long talk. And Ican
guarantee you it’s not like people say. Or what’s put in the
papers. Those boys didn’t go to that house planning to do
violence. My boy didn’t. He may have some bad sides, but
he’s nowhere near bad as that. Smitty’s the one. Dick told
me he didn’t even know it when Smitty attacked the man
[Mr. Clutter], cut his throat. Dick wasn’t even in the same
room. He only run in when he heard them struggling. Dick
was carrying his shotgun, and how he described it was:
‘Smitty took my shotgun and just blew that man’s head off.’
And he says, ‘Dad, Iought to have grabbed back the gun
and shot Smitty dead. Killed him ’fore he killed the rest of
that family. If I’d done it I’d be better off than Iam now.’ I
guess he would, too. How it is, the way folks feel, he don’t
stand no chance. They’ll hang them both. And,” he added,
fatigue and defeat glazing his eyes, “having your boy hang,
knowing he will, nothing worse can happen to a man.”
Neither Perry Smith’s father nor sister wrote him or came to
see him. Tex John Smith was presumed to be prospecting
for gold somewhere in Alaska—though lawmen, despite
great effort, had been unable to locate him. The sister had
told investigators that she was afraid of her brother, and
requested that they please not let him know her present
address. (When informed of this, Smith smiled slightly and
said, “Iwish she’d been in that house that night. What a
sweet scene!”)
Except for the squirrel, except for the Meiers and an
occasional consultation with his lawyer, Mr. Fleming, Perry
was very much alone. He missed Dick. Many thoughts of
Dick, he wrote one day in his makeshift diary. Since their
arrest they had not been allowed to communicate, and that,
freedom aside, was what he most desired—to talk to Dick,
be with him again. Dick was not the “hardrock” he’d once
thought him: “pragmatic,” “virile,” “a real brass boy”; he’d
proven himself to be “pretty weak and shallow,” “a coward.”
Still, of everyone in all the world, this was the person to
whom he was closest at that moment, for they at least were
of the same species, brothers in the breed of Cain;
separated from him, Perry felt “all by myself. Like
somebody covered with sores. Somebody only a big nut
would have anything to do with.”
But then one mid-February morning Perry received a letter.
It was postmarked Reading, Mass., and it read:
Dear Perry, Iwas sorry to hear about the trouble you are
in and Idecided to write and let you know that Iremember
you and would like to help you in any way that Ican. In case
you don’t remember my name, Don Cullivan, I’ve enclosed
a picture taken at about the time we met. When Ifirst read
about you in the news recently Iwas startled and then I
began to think back to those days when Iknew you. While
we were never close personal friends Ican remember you
a lot more clearly than most fellows Imet in the Army. It
must have been about the fall of 1951 when you were
assigned to the 761st Engineer Light Equipment Company
at Fort Lewis, Washington. You were short (I’m not much
taller), solidly built, dark with a heavy shock of black hair
and a grin on your face almost all the time. Since you had
lived in Alaska quite a few of the fellows used to call you
“Eskimo.” One of my first recollections of you was at a
Company inspection in which all the footlockers were open
for inspection. As Irecall it all the footlockers were in order,
even yours, except that the inside cover of your footlocker
was plastered with pictures of pin-up girls. The rest of us
were sure you were in for trouble. But the inspecting officer
took it in stride and when it was all over and he let it pass I
think we all felt you were a nervy guy. Iremember that you
were a fairly good pool player and Ican picture you quite
clearly in the Company day room at the pool table. You
were one of the best truck drivers in the outfit. Remember
the Army field problems we went out on? On one trip that
took place in the winter Iremember that we each were
assigned to a truck for the duration of the problem. In our
outfit, Army trucks had no heaters and it used to get pretty
cold in those cabs. Iremember you cutting a hole in the
floor-boards of your truck in order to let the heat from the
engine come into the cab. The reason Iremember this so
well is the impression it made on me because “mutilation”
of Army property was a crime for which you could get
severely punished. Of course Iwas pretty green in the Army
and probably afraid to stretch the rules even a little bit, but I
can remember you grinning about it (and keeping warm)
while Iworried about it (and froze). Irecall that you bought a
motorcycle, and vaguely remember you had some trouble
with it—chased by the police?—crackup? Whatever it was,
it was the first time Irealized the wild streak in you. Some of
my recollections may be wrong; this was over eight years
ago and Ionly knew you for a period of about eight months.
From what Iremember, though, Igot along with you very
well and rather liked you. You always seemed cheerful and
cocky, you were good at your Army work and Ican’t
remember that you did much griping. Of course you were
apparently quite wild but Inever knew too much about that.
But now you are in real trouble. Itry to imagine what you are
like now. What you think about. When first Iread about you I
was stunned. Ireally was. But then Iput the paper down and
turned to something else. But the thought of you returned. I
wasn’t satisfied just to forget. Iam, or try to be, fairly
religious [Catholic]. Iwasn’t always. Iused to just drift along
with little thought about the only important thing there is. I
never considered death or the possibility of a life hereafter.
Iwas too much alive: car, college, dating, etc. But my kid
brother died of leukemia when he was just 17 years old. He
knew he was dying and afterwards Iused to wonder what
he thought about. And now Ithink of you, and wonder what
you think about. Ididn’t know what to say to my brother in
the last weeks before he died. But Iknow what I’d say now.
And this is why Iam writing you: because God made you as
well as me and He loves you just as He loves me, and for
the little we know of God’s will what has happened to you
could have happened to me. Your friend, Don Cullivan.
The name meant nothing, but Perry at once recognized the
face in the photograph of a young soldier with crew-cut hair
and round, very earnest eyes. He read the letter many
times; though he found the religious allusions unpersuasive
(“I’ve tried to believe, but Idon’t, Ican’t, and there’s no use
pretending”), he was thrilled by it. Here was someone
offering help, a sane and respectable man who had once
known and liked him, a man who signed himself friend.
Gratefully, in great haste, he started a reply: “Dear Don, Hell
yes Iremember Don Cullivan . . .”
Hickock’s cell had no window; he faced a wide corridor
and the façades of other cells. But he was not isolated,
there were people to talk to, a plentiful turnover of
drunkards, forgers, wife-beaters, and Mexican vagrants;
and Dick, with his light-hearted “con-man” patter, his sex
anecdotes and gamy jokes, was popular with the inmates
(though there was one who had no use for him whatever—
an old man who hissed at him: “Killer! Killer!” and who once
drenched him with a bucketful of dirty scrubwater).
Outwardly, Hickock seemed to one and all an unusually
untroubled young man. When he was not socializing or
sleeping, he lay on his cot smoking or chewing gum and
reading sports magazines or paperback thrillers. Often he
simply lay there whistling old favorites (“You Must Have
Been a Beautiful Baby,” “Shuffle Off to Buffalo”), and staring
at an unshaded light bulb that burned day and night in the
ceiling of the cell. He hated the light bulb’s monotonous
surveillance; it disturbed his sleep and, more explicitly,
endangered the success of a private project—escape. For
the prisoner was not as unconcerned as he appeared to
be, or as resigned; he intended taking every step possible
to avoid “a ride on the Big Swing.” Convinced that such a
ceremony would be the outcome of any trial—certainly any
trial held in the State of Kansas—he had decided to “bust
jail. Grab a car and raise dust.” But first he must have a
weapon; and over a period of weeks he’d been making
one: a “shiv,” an instrument very like an icepick—something
that would fit with lethal niceness between the shoulder-
blades of Undersheriff Meier. The weapon’s components, a
piece of wood and a length of hard wire, were originally
part of a toilet brush he’d confiscated, dismantled and
hidden under his mattress. Late at night, when the only
noises were snores and coughs and the mournful whistle-
wailings of Santa Fe trains rumbling through the darkened
town, he honed the wire against the cell’s concrete floor.
And while he worked he schemed.
Once, the first winter after he had finished high school,
Hickock had hitchhiked across Kansas and Colorado:
“This was when Iwas looking for a job. Well, Iwas riding in
a truck, and the driver, me and him got into a little
argument, no reason exactly, but he beat up on me. Shoved
me out. Just left me there. High the hell up in the Rockies. It
was sleeting like, and Iwalked miles, my nose bleeding like
fifteen pigs. Then Icome to a bunch of cabins on a wooded
slope. Summer cabins, all locked up and empty that time of
year. And Ibroke into one of them. There was firewood and
canned goods, even some whiskey. Ilaid up there over a
week, and it was one of the best times Iever knew. Despite
the fact my nose hurt so and my eyes were green and
yellow. And when the snow stopped the sun came out. You
never saw such skies. Like Mexico. If Mexico was in a cold
climate. Ihunted through the other cabins and found some
smoked hams and a radio and a rifle. It was great. Out all
day with a gun. With the sun in my face. Boy, Ifelt good. I
felt like Tarzan. And every night Iate beans and fried ham
and rolled up in a blanket by the fire and fell asleep listening
to music on the radio. Nobody came near the place. Ibet I
could’ve stayed till spring.” If the escape succeeded, that
was the course Dick had determined upon—to head for the
Colorado mountains, and find there a cabin where he could
hide until spring (alone, of course; Perry’s future did not
concern him). The prospect of so idyllic an interim added to
the inspired stealth with which he whetted his wire, filed it to
a limber stiletto fineness.
Thursday 10 March. Sheriff had a shake-out. Searched
through all the cells and found a shiv tucked under D’s
mattress. Wonder what he had in mind (smile).
Not that Perry really considered it a smiling matter, for Dick,
flourishing a dangerous weapon, could have played a
decisive role in plans he himself was forming. As the weeks
went by he had become familiar with life on Courthouse
Square, its habitués and their habits. The cats, for example:
the two thin gray toms who appeared with every twilight and
prowled the Square, stopping to examine the cars parked
around its periphery—behavior puzzling to him until Mrs.
Meier explained that the cats were hunting for dead birds
caught in the vehicles’ engine grilles. Thereafter it pained
him to watch their maneuvers: “Because most of my life I’ve
done what they’re doing. The equivalent.”
And there was one man of whom Perry had grown
especially aware, a robust, upright gentleman with hair like
a gray-and-silver skullcap; his face, filled out, firm-jawed,
was somewhat cantankerous in repose, the mouth down-
curved, the eyes downcast as though in mirthless reverie—
a picture of unsparing sternness. And yet this was at least a
partially inaccurate impression, for now and again the
prisoner glimpsed him as he paused to talk to other men,
joke with them and laugh, and then he seemed carefree,
jovial, generous: “The kind of person who might see the
human side”—an important attribute, for the man was
Roland H. Tate, Judge of the 32nd Judicial District, the
jurist who would preside at the trial of the State of Kansas
versus Smith and Hickock. Tate, as Perry soon learned,
was an old and awesome name in western Kansas. The
judge was rich, he raised horses, he owned much land, and
his wife was said to be very beautiful. He was the father of
two sons, but the younger had died, a tragedy that greatly
affected the parents and led them to adopt a small boy who
had appeared in court as an abandoned, homeless child.
“He sounds soft-hearted to me,” Perry once said to Mrs.
Meier. “Maybe he’ll give us a break.”
But that was not what Perry really believed; he believed
what he’d written Don Cullivan, with whom he now
corresponded regularly: his crime was “unforgivable,” and
he fully expected to “climb those thirteen steps.” However,
he was not altogether without hope, for he too had plotted
an escape. It depended upon a pair of young men that he
had often observed observing him. One was red-haired, the
other dark. Sometimes, standing in the Square under the
tree that touched the cell window, they smiled and signaled
to him—or so he imagined. Nothing was ever said, and
always, after perhaps a minute, they drifted away. But the
prisoner had convinced himself that the young men,
possibly motivated by a desire for adventure, meant to help
him escape. Accordingly, he drew a map of the Square,
indicating the points at which a “getaway car” could most
advantageously be stationed. Beneath the map he wrote: I
need a HacksawBlade 5”. Nothing else. But do you
realize the consequences if you get caught (nod your
head if you do)? It could mean a long stretch in prison. Or
you might get killed. All for someone you don’t know. YOU
BETTER THINK IT OVER!! Seriously! Besides, howdo I
knowI can trust you? Howdo I knowit isn’t a trick to get me
out there and gun me down? What about Hickock? All
preparations must include him.
Perry kept this document on his desk, wadded and ready to
drop out the window the next time the young men
appeared. But they never did; he never saw them again.
Eventually, he wondered if perhaps he had invented them
(a notion that he “might not be normal, maybe insane” had
troubled him “even when Iwas little, and my sisters laughed
because Iliked moonlight. To hide in the shadows and
watch the moon”). Phantoms or not, he ceased to think of
the young men. Another method of escape, suicide,
replaced them in his musings; and despite the jailer’s
precautions (no mirror, no belt or tie or shoelaces), he had
devised a way to do it. For he also was furnished with a
ceiling bulb that burned eternally, but, unlike Hickock, he
had in his cell a broom, and by pressing the broom-brush
against the bulb he could unscrew it. One night he dreamed
that he’d unscrewed the bulb, broken it, and with the broken
glass cut his wrists and ankles. “Ifelt all breath and light
leaving me,” he said, in a subsequent description of his
sensations. “The walls of the cell fell away, the sky came
down, Isaw the big yellow bird.”
Throughout his life—as a child, poor and meanly treated, as
a foot-loose youth, as an imprisoned man—the yellow bird,
huge and parrot-faced, had soared across Perry’s dreams,
an avenging angel who savaged his enemies or, as now,
rescued him in moments of mortal danger: “She lifted me, I
could have been light as a mouse, we went up, up, Icould
see the Square below, men running, yelling, the sheriff
shooting at us, everybody sore as hell because Iwas free, I
was flying, Iwas better than any of them.”
The trial was scheduled to start on March 22, 1960. In the
weeks preceding that date the defense attorneys frequently
consulted the defendants. The advisability of requesting a
change of venue was discussed, but as the elderly Mr.
Fleming warned his client, “It wouldn’t matter where in
Kansas the trial was held. Sentiment’s the same all over the
state. We’re probably better off in Garden City. This is a
religious community. Eleven thousand population and
twenty-two churches. And most of the ministers are
opposed to capital punishment, say it’s immoral,
unchristian; even the Reverend Cowan, the Clutters’ own
minister and a close friend of the family, he’s been
preaching against the death penalty in this very case.
Remember, all we can hope is to save your lives. Ithink we
stand as good a chance here as anywhere.”
Soon after the original arraignment of Smith and Hickock,
their advocates appeared before Judge Tate to argue a
motion urging comprehensive psychiatric examinations for
the accused. Specifically, the court was asked to permit the
state hospital in Larned, Kansas, a mental institution with
maximum-security facilities, to take custody of the
prisoners for the purpose of ascertaining whether either or
both were “insane, imbeciles or idiots, unable to
comprehend their position and aid in their defense.”
Larned is a hundred miles east of Garden City; Hickock’s
attorney, Harrison Smith, informed the court that he had
driven there the previous day and conferred with several of
the hospital’s staff: “We have no qualified psychiatrists in
our own community. In fact, Larned is the only place within a
radius of two hundred and twenty-five miles where you’ll find
such men—doctors trained to make serious psychiatric
evaluations. That takes time. Four to eight weeks. But the
personnel with whom Idiscussed the matter said they were
willing to start work at once; and, of course, being a state
institution it won’t cost the county a nickel.”
This plan was opposed by the special assistant
prosecuting attorney, Logan Green, who, certain that
“temporary insanity” was the defense his antagonists would
attempt to sustain in the forthcoming trial, feared that the
ultimate outcome of the proposal would be, as he predicted
in private conversation, the appearance on the witness
stand of a “pack of head-healers” sympathetic to the
defendants (“Those fellows, they’re always crying over the
killers. Never a thought for the victims”). Short, pugnacious,
a Kentuckian by birth, Green began by pointing out to the
court that Kansas’ law, in regard to sanity, adheres to the
M’Naghten Rule, the ancient British importation which
contends that if the accused knew the nature of his act, and
knew it was wrong, then he is mentally competent and
responsible for his actions. Furthermore, said Green, there
was nothing in the Kansas statutes indicating that the
physicians chosen to determine a defendant’s mental
condition must be of any particular qualification: “Just plain
doctors. Medical doctors in general practice. That’s all the
law requires. We have sanity hearings in this county every
year for the purpose of committing people to the institution.
We never call anybody in from Larned or psychiatric
institutions of any kind. Our own local physicians attend to
the matter. It’s no great job to find whether a man is insane
or an idiot or an imbecile . . . It is entirely unnecessary, a
waste of time to send the defendants to Larned.”
In rebuttal, Counsel Smith suggested that the present
situation was “far graver than a simple sanity hearing in
probate court. Two lives are at stake. Whatever their crime,
these men are entitled to examination by persons of
training and experience. Psychiatry,” he added, pleading
with the judge quite directly, “has matured rapidly in the
past twenty years. The Federal courts are beginning to
keep in tune with this science as related to people charged
with criminal offenses. It just seems to me we have a
golden opportunity to face up to the new concepts in this
field.”
It was an opportunity the judge preferred to reject, for as a
fellow jurist once remarked, “Tate is what you might call a
law-book lawyer, he never experiments, he goes strictly by
the text”; but the same critic also said of him, “If Iwere
innocent, he’s the first man I’d want on the bench; if Iwas
guilty, the last.” Judge Tate did not entirely deny the motion;
rather, he did exactly all the law demanded by appointing a
commission of three Garden City doctors and directing
them to pronounce a verdict upon the mental capacities of
the prisoners. (In due course the medical trio met the
accused and, after an hour or so of conversational prying,
announced that neither man suffered from any mental
disorder. When told of their diagnosis, Perry Smith said,
“How would they know? They just wanted to be entertained.
Hear all the morbid details from the killer’s own terrible lips.
Oh, their eyes were shining.” Hickock’s attorney was also
angry; once more he traveled to Larned State Hospital,
where he appealed for the unpaid services of a psychiatrist
willing to go to Garden City and interview the defendants.
The one man who volunteered, Dr. W. Mitchell Jones, was
exceptionally competent; not yet thirty, a sophisticated
specialist in criminal psychology and the criminally insane
who had worked and studied in Europe and the United
States, he agreed to examine Smith and Hickock, and,
should his findings warrant it, testify in their behalf.)
On the morning of March 14 counsels for the defense again
stood before Judge Tate, there on this occasion to plead
for a postponement of the trial, which was then eight days
distant. Two reasons were given, the first was that a “most
material witness,” Hickock’s father, was at present too ill to
testify. The second was a subtler matter. During the past
week a boldly lettered notice had begun to appear in the
town’s shop windows, and in banks, restaurants, and at the
railroad station; and it read: H. W. CLUTTER ESTATE AUCTION
SALE *21 MARCH 1960 * AT THE CLUTTER HOMESTEAD. “Now,”
said Harrison Smith, addressing the bench, “Irealize it is
almost impossible to prove prejudice. But this sale, an
auction of the victim’s estate, occurs one week from today
—in other words, the very day before the trial begins.
Whether that’s prejudicial to the defendants I’m not able to
state. But these signs, coupled with newspaper
advertisements, and advertisements on the radio, will be a
constant reminder to every citizen in the community, among
whom one hundred and fifty have been called as
prospective jurors.”
Judge Tate was not impressed. He denied the motion
without comment.
Earlier in the year Mr. Clutter’s Japanese neighbor, Hideo
Ashida, had auctioned his farming equipment and moved
to Nebraska. The Ashida sale, which was considered a
success, attracted not quite a hundred customers. Slightly
more than five thousand people attended the Clutter
auction. Holcomb’s citizenry expected an unusual turnout—
the Ladies’ Circle of the Holcomb Community Church had
converted one of the Clutter barns into a cafeteria stocked
with two hundred homemade pies, two hundred and fifty
pounds of hamburger meat, and sixty pounds of sliced ham
—but no one was prepared for the largest auction crowd in
the history of western Kansas. Cars converged on Holcomb
from half the counties in the state, and from Oklahoma,
Colorado, Texas, Nebraska. They came bumper to bumper
down the lane leading to River Valley Farm.
It was the first time the public had been permitted to visit
the Clutter place since the discovery of the murders, a
circumstance which explained the presence of perhaps a
third of the immense congregation—those who had come
out of curiosity. And of course the weather was an aid to
attendance, for by mid-March winter’s high snows have
dissolved, and the earth beneath, thoroughly thawed, has
emerged as acre upon acre of ankle-deep mud; there is
not much a farmer can do until the ground hardens. “Land’s
so wet and nasty,” said Mrs. Bill Ramsey, the wife of a
farmer. “Can’t work nohow. We figured we might as well
drive on out to the sale.” Actually, it was a beautiful day.
Spring. Though mud abounded underfoot, the sun, so long
shrouded by snow and cloud, seemed an object freshly
made, and the trees—Mr. Clutter’s orchard of pear and
apple trees, the elms shading the lane—were lightly veiled
in a haze of virginal green. The fine lawn surrounding the
Clutter house was also newly green, and trespassers upon
it, women anxious to have a closer look at the uninhabited
home, crept across the grass and peered through the
windows as though hopeful but fearful of discerning, in the
gloom beyond the pleasant flower-print curtains, grim
apparitions.
Shouting, the auctioneer praised his wares—tractors,
trucks, wheelbarrows, nail kegs and sledgehammers and
unused lumber, milk buckets, branding irons, horses,
horseshoes, everything needed to run a ranch from rope
and harness to sheep dip and tin washtubs—it was the
prospect of buying this merchandise at bargain prices that
had lured most of the crowd. But the hands of bidders
flickered shyly—work-roughened hands timid of parting with
hard-earned cash; yet nothing went unsold, there was even
someone keen to acquire a bunch of rusty keys, and a
youthful cowboy sporting pale-yellow boots bought Kenyon
Clutter’s “coyote wagon,” the dilapidated vehicle the dead
boy had used to harass coyotes, chase them on moonlit
nights.
The stagehands, the men who hauled the smaller items on
and off the auctioneer’s podium, were Paul Helm, Vic Irsik,
and Alfred Stoecklein, each of them an old, still-faithful
employee of the late Herbert W. Clutter. Assisting at the
disposal of his possessions was their final service, for
today was their last day at River Valley Farm; the property
had been leased to an Oklahoma rancher, and
henceforward strangers would live and work there. As the
auction progressed, and Mr. Clutter’s worldly domain
dwindled, gradually vanished, Paul Helm, remembering the
burial of the murdered family, said, “It’s like a second
funeral.”
The last thing to go was the contents of the livestock corral,
mostly horses, including Nancy’s horse, big, fat Babe, who
was much beyond her prime. It was late afternoon, school
was out, and several schoolmates of Nancy’s were among
the spectators when bidding on the horse began; Susan
Kidwell was there. Sue, who had adopted another of
Nancy’s orphaned pets, a cat, wished she could give Babe
a home, for she loved the old horse and knew how much
Nancy had loved her. The two girls had often gone riding
together aboard Babe’s wide back, jogged through the
wheat fields on hot summer evenings down to the river and
into the water, the mare wading against the current until, as
Sue once described it, “the three of us were cool as fish.”
But Sue had no place to keep a horse.
“Ihear fifty . . . sixty-five . . . seventy . . .”: the bidding was
laggardly, nobody seemed really to want Babe, and the
man who got her, a Mennonite farmer who said he might
use her for plowing, paid seventy-five dollars. As he led her
out of the corral, Sue Kidwell ran forward; she raised her
hand as though to wave goodbye, but instead clasped it
over her mouth.
The Garden City Telegram, on the eve of the trial’s start,
printed the following editorial: “Some may think the eyes of
the entire nation are on Garden City during this sensational
murder trial. But they are not. Even a hundred miles west of
here in Colorado few persons are even acquainted with the
case—other than just remembering some members of a
prominent family were slain. This is a sad commentary on
the state of crime in our nation. Since the four members of
the Clutter family were killed last fall, several other such
multiple murders have occurred in various parts of the
country. Just during the few days leading up to this trial at
least three mass murder cases broke into the headlines.
As a result, this crime and trial are just one of many such
cases people have read about and forgotten. . . .”
Although the eyes of the nation were not upon them, the
demeanor of the event’s main participants, from the court
recorder to the judge himself, was markedly self-aware on
the morning of the court’s first convening. All four of the
lawyers sported new suits; the new shoes of the big-footed
county attorney creaked and squealed with every step.
Hickock, too, was sharply dressed in clothes provided by
his parents: trim blue-serge trousers, a white shirt, a narrow
dark-blue tie. Only Perry Smith, who owned neither jacket
nor tie, seemed sartorially misplaced. Wearing an open-
necked shirt (borrowed from Mr. Meier) and blue jeans
rolled up at the cuffs, he looked as lonely and inappropriate
as a seagull in a wheat field.
The courtroom, an unpretentious chamber situated on the
third floor of the Finney County Courthouse, has dull white
walls and furnishings of darkly varnished wood. The
spectator benches can seat perhaps one hundred and sixty
persons. On Tuesday morning, March 22, the benches
were occupied exclusively by the all-male venire of Finney
County residents from which a jury was to be selected. Not
many of the summoned citizenry seemed anxious to serve
(one potential juror, in conversation with another, said,
“They can’t use me. Ican’t hear well enough.” To which his
friend, after a bit of sly reflection, replied, “Come to think of
it, my hearing’s not too good either”), and it was generally
thought that the choosing of the jury would take several
days. As it turned out, the process was completed within
four hours; moreover, the jury, including two alternative
members, was extracted from the first forty-four candidates.
Seven were rejected on pre-emptory challenge by the
defense, and three were excused at the request of the
prosecution; another twenty won dismissal either because
they opposed capital punishment or because they admitted
to having already formed a firm opinion regarding the guilt
of the defendants.
The fourteen men ultimately elected consisted of half a
dozen farmers, a pharmacist, a nursery manager, an airport
employee, a well driller, two salesmen, a machinist, and the
manager of Ray’s Bowling Alley. They were all family men
(several had five children or more), and were seriously
affiliated with one or another of the local churches. During
the voir dire examination, four of them told the court that
they had been personally, though not intimately, acquainted
with Mr. Clutter; but upon further questioning, each said he
did not feel this circumstance would hinder his ability to
reach an impartial verdict. The airport employee, a middle-
aged man named N. L. Dunnan, said, when asked his
opinion of capital punishment, “Ordinarily I’m against it. But
in this case, no”—a declaration which, to some who heard
it, seemed clearly indicative of prejudice. Dunnan was
nevertheless accepted as a juror.
The defendants were inattentive observers of the voir dire
proceedings. The previous day, Dr. Jones, the psychiatrist
who had volunteered to examine them, had interviewed
them separately for approximately two hours: at the end of
the interviews, he had suggested that they each write for
him an autobiographical statement, and it was the act of
composing these statements that occupied the accused
throughout the hours spent assembling a jury. Seated at
opposite ends of their counsels’ table, Hickock worked with
a pen and Smith with a pencil.
Smith wrote:
Iwas born Perry Edward Smith Oct. 27 1928 in
Huntington, Elko County, Nevada, which is situated way out
in the boon docks, so to speak. Irecall that in 1929 our
family had ventured to Juneau, Alaska. In my family were
my brother Tex Jr. (he later changed his name to James
because of the ridicule of the name “Tex” & also Ibelieve
he hated my father in his early years—my mother’s doing).
My sister Fern (She also changed her name—to Joy). My
sister Barbara. And myself. . . . In Juneau, my father was
making bootleg hooch. Ibelieve it was during this period
my mother became acquainted with alcohol. Mom & Dad
began having quarrels. Iremember my mother was
“entertaining” some sailors while my father was away.
When he came home a fight ensued, and my father, after a
violent struggle, threw the sailors out & proceeded to beat
my mother. Iwas frightfully scared, in fact all us children
were terrified. Crying. Iwas scared because Ithought my
father was going to hurt me, also because he was beating
my mother. Ireally didn’t understand why he was beating
her but Ifelt she must have done something dreadfully
wrong. . . . The next thing Ican vaguely recall is living in Fort
Bragg, Calif. My brother had been presented a B.B. gun.
He had shot a hummingbird, and after he had shot it he was
sorry. Iasked him to let me shoot the B.B. gun. He pushed
me away, telling me Iwas too small. It made me so mad I
started to cry. After Ifinished crying, my anger mounted
again, and during the evening when the B.B. gun was
behind the chair my brother was sitting in, Igrabbed it &
held it to my brother’s ear & hollered BANG! My father (or
mother) beat me and made me apologize. My brother used
to shoot at a big white horse riden by a neighbor who went
by our place on his way to town. The neighbor caught my
brother and Ihiding in the bushes and took us to Dad & we
got a beating & brother had his B.B. gun taken away & I
was glad he had his gun taken away! . . . This is about all I
remember when we lived in Fort Bragg (Oh! We kids used
to jump from a hay-loft, holding an umbrella, onto a pile of
hay on the ground). . . . My next recollection is several years
later when we were living in Calif.? Nevada? Irecall a very
odious episode between my mother and a Negro. We
children slept on a porch in the summertime. One of our
beds was directly under my mother and father’s room.
Everyone of us kids had taken a good look through the
partly open curtain and seen what was going on. Dad had
hired a Negro (Sam) to do odd jobs around the farm, or
ranch, while he was working somewhere down the road. He
used to come home late in the evening in his Model A truck.
Ido not recall the chain of events but assumed Dad had
known or suspected what was happening. It ended in a
seperation between Mom & Dad & Mom took us kids to
San Francisco. She run off with Dad’s truck & all of the
many souvenirs he brought from Alaska. Ibelieve this was
in 1935 (?). . . . In Frisco Iwas continously in trouble. Ihad
started to run around with a gang, all of which were older
than myself. My mother was always drunk, never in a fit
condition to properly provide and care for us. Irun as free &
wild as a coyote. There was no rule or discipline, or anyone
to show me right from wrong. Icame & went as Ipleased—
until my first encounter with Trouble. Iwas in & out of
Detention Homes many many times for running away from
home & stealing. Iremember one place Iwas sent to. Ihad
weak kidneys & wet the bed every night. This was very
humiliating to me, but Icouldn’t control myself. Iwas very
severly beaten by the cottage mistress, who had called me
names and made fun of me in front of all the boys. She
used to come around at all hours of the night to see if Iwet
the bed. She would throw back the covers & furiously beat
me with a large black leather belt—pull me out of bed by my
hair & drag me to the bathroom & throw me in the tub & turn
the cold water on & tell me to wash myself and the sheets.
Every night was a nightmare. Later on she thought it was
very funny to put some kind of ointment on my penis. This
was almost unbearable. It burned something terrible. She
was later discharged from her job. But this never changed
my mind about her & what Iwished Icould have done to her
& all the people who made fun of me.
Then, because Dr. Jones had told him he must have the
statement that very afternoon, Smith skipped forward to
early adolescence and the years he and his father had lived
together, the two of them wandering all over the West and
Far West, prospecting, trapping, doing odd jobs:
Iloved my father but there were times when this love and
affection Ihad for him drained from my heart like wasted
water. Whenever he would not try to understand my
problems. Give me a little consideration & voice &
responsibility. Ihad to get away from him. When Iwas
sixteen Ijoined the Merchant Marine. In 1948 Ijoined the
army—the recruiting officer gave me a break and upped
my test. From this time on Istarted to realize the
importance of an education. This only added to the hatred
and bitterness Iheld for others. Ibegan to get into fights. I
threw a Japanese policeman off a bridge into the water. I
was court-martialed for demolishing a Japanese cafe. I
was court-martialed again in Kyoto, Japan, for stealing a
Japanese taxicab. Iwas in the army almost four years. Ihad
many violent outbursts of anger while Iserved time in Japan
& Korea. Iwas in Korea 15 months, was rotated and sent
back to the states—and was given special recognition as
being the first Korean Vet to come back to the territory of
Alaska. Big write up, picture in paper, paid trip to Alaska by
air, all the trimmings. . . . Ifinished my army service in Ft.
Lewis, Washington.
Smith’s pencil sped almost indecipherably as he hurried
toward more recent history: the motorcycle accident that
had crippled him, the burglary in Phillipsburg, Kansas, that
had led to his first prison sentence:
. . . Iwas sentenced to 5 to 10 years for grand larceny,
burglary and jailbreak. Ifelt Iwas very unjustly dealt with. I
became very bitter while Iwas in prison. Upon my release I
was supposed to go to Alaska with my father—Ididn’t go—
Iworked for a while in Nevada and Idaho-went to Las
Vegas and continued to Kansas where got into the
situation I’m in now. No time for more.
He signed his name, and added a postscript:
“Would like to speak to you again. There’s much Ihaven’t
said that may interest you. Ihave always felt a remarkable
exhiliration being among people with a purpose and sense
of dedication to carry out that purpose. Ifelt this about you
in your presence.”
Hickock did not write with his companion’s intensity. He
often stopped to listen to the questioning of a prospective
juror, or to stare at the faces around him—particularly, and
with plain displeasure, the muscular face of the county
attorney, Duane West, who was his own age, twenty-eight.
But his statement, written in a stylized script that looked like
slanting rain, was finished before the court adjourned for
the day:
Iwill try to tell you all Ican about myself, though most of
my early life is vague to me—up until about my tenth
birthday. My school years went quite the same as most
other boys my own age. Ihad my share of fights, girls, and
other things that go with a growing boy. My home life was
also normal, but as Itold you before, Iwas hardly ever
allowed to leave my yard and visit with playmates. My father
was always strict about us boys [his brother and him] in that
line. Also Ihad to help my dad quite a lot around the
house. . . . Ican only remember my mother and dad having
one argument that amounted to anything. What it was
about, Idon’t know. . . . My dad bought me a bicycle once,
and Ibelieve that Iwas the proudest boy in town. It was a
girl’s bike and he changed it over to a boy’s. He painted it
all up and it looked like new. But Ihad a lot of toys when I
was little, a lot for the financial condition that my folks were
in. We were always what you would call semi-poor. Never
down and out, but several times on the verge of it. My dad
was a hard worker and did his best to provide for us. My
mother also was always a hard worker. Her house was
always neat, and we had clean clothes aplenty. Iremember
my dad used to wear those old fashioned flat crown caps,
and he would make me wear them too, and Ididn’t like
them. . . . In high-school Idid real well, made above
average grades the first year or two. But then started falling
off a little. Ihad a girl friend. She was a nice girl, and Inever
once tried to touch her anyway but just kissing. It was a real
clean courtship. . . . While in school Iparticipated in all the
sports, and received 9 letters in all. Basketball, football,
track and baseball. My senior year was best. Inever had
any steady girl, just played the field. That was when Ihad
my first relationship with a girl. Of course Itold the boys that
I’d had a lot of girls. . . . Igot offers from two colleges to play
ball, but never attended any of them. After Igraduated from
school Iwent to work for the Santa Fe railroad, and stayed
until the following winter when Igot laid off. The following
spring Igot a job with the Roark Motor Company. Ihad
been working there about four months when Ihad an
automobile wreck with a company car. Iwas in the hospital
several days with extensive head injuries. While Iwas in the
condition Iwas in Icouldn’t find another job, so Iwas
unemployed most of the winter. Meantime, Ihad met a girl
and fallen in love. Her dad was a Baptist preacher and
resented me going with her. In July we were married. All hell
broke loose from her dad until he learned she was
pregnant. But still he never wished me good luck and that
has always gone against the grain. After we were married, I
worked at a service-station near Kansas City. Iworked
from 8 at night till 8 in the morning. Sometimes my wife
stayed with me all night—she was afraid Icouldn’t keep
awake, so she came to help me. Then Igot an offer to work
at Perry Pontiac, which Igladly accepted. It was very
satisfactory, though Ididn’t make a lot of money—$75 a
week. Igot along good with the other men, and was well
liked by my boss. Iworked there five years. . . . During my
employment there was the beginning of some of the lowest
things Ihave ever done.
Here Hickock revealed his pedophiliac tendencies, and
after describing several sample experiences, wrote:
Iknow it is wrong. But at the time Inever give any thought
to whether it is right or wrong. The same with stealing. It
seems to be an impulse. One thing Inever told you about
the Clutter deal is this. Before Iever went to their house I
knew there would be a girl there. Ithink the main reason I
went there was not to rob them but to rape the girl. Because
Ithought a lot about it. That is one reason why Inever
wanted to turn back when we started to. Even when Isaw
there was no safe. Idid make some advances toward the
Clutter girl when Iwas there. But Perry never gave me a
chance. Ihope no one finds this out but you, as Ihaven’t
even told my lawyer. There were other things Ishould have
told you, but I’m afraid of my people finding them out.
Because Iam more ashamed of them (these things Idid)
than hanging. . . . Ihave had sickness. Ithink caused from
the car wreck Ihad. Spells of passing out, and sometimes I
would hemhorrage at the nose and left ear. Ihad one at
some people’s house by the name of Crist—they live south
of my parents. Not long ago Ihad a piece of glass work out
of my head. It came out the corner of my eye. My dad
helped me to get it out. . . . Ifigure Ishould tell you the things
that led to my divorce, and things that caused me to go to
prison. It started the early part of 1957. My wife and Iwere
living in an apartment in Kansas City. Ihad quit my job at
the automobile company, and went into the garage
business for myself. Iwas renting the garage from a woman
who had a daughter-in-law named Margaret. Imet this girl
one day while Iwas at work, and we went to have a cup of
coffee. Her husband was away in the Marine Corps. To
make a long story short, Istarted going out with her. My wife
sued for divorce. Ibegan thinking Inever really loved my
wife. Because if Ihad, Iwouldn’t have done all the things I’d
done. So Inever fought the divorce. Istarted drinking, and
was drunk for almost a month. Ineglected my business,
spent more money than Iearned, wrote bad checks, and in
the end became a thief. For this last Iwas sent to the
penitentiary. . . . My lawyer said Ishould be truthful with you
as you can help me. And Ineed help, as you know.
The next day, Wednesday, was the proper start of the trial;
it was also the first time ordinary spectators were admitted
into the courtroom, an area too small to accommodate
more than a modest percentage of those who applied at
the door. The best seats had been reserved for twenty
members of the press, and for such special personages as
Hickock’s parents and Donald Cullivan (who, at the request
of Perry Smith’s lawyer, had traveled from Massachusetts
to appear as a character witness in behalf of his former
Army friend). It had been rumored that the two surviving
Clutter daughters would be present; they were not, nor did
they attend any subsequent session. The family was
represented by Mr. Clutter’s younger brother, Arthur, who
had driven a hundred miles to be there. He told newsmen: “I
just want to get a good look at them [Smith and Hickock]. I
just want to see what kind of animals they are. The way I
feel, Icould tear them apart.” He took a seat directly behind
the defendants, and fixed them with a gaze of unique
persistence, as though he planned to paint their portraits
from memory. Presently, and it was as if Arthur Clutter had
willed him to do it, Perry Smith turned and looked at him—
and recognized a face very like the face of the man he had
killed: the same mild eyes, narrow lips, firm chin. Perry, who
was chewing gum, stopped chewing; he lowered his eyes,
a minute elapsed, then slowly his jaws began to move
again. Except for this moment, Smith, and Hickock too,
affected a courtroom attitude that was simultaneously
uninterested and disinterested; they chewed gum and
tapped their feet with languid impatience as the state
summoned its first witness.
Nancy Ewalt. And after Nancy, Susan Kidwell. The young
girls described what they saw upon entering the Clutter
house on Sunday, November 15: the quiet rooms, an empty
purse on a kitchen floor, sunshine in a bedroom, and their
schoolmate, Nancy Clutter, surrounded by her own blood.
The defense waived cross-examination, a policy they
pursued with the next three witnesses (Nancy Ewalt’s
father, Clarence, and Sheriff Earl Robinson, and the county
coroner, Dr. Robert Fenton), each of whom added to the
narrative of events that sunny November morning: the
discovery, finally, of all four victims, and accounts of how
they looked, and, from Dr. Fenton, a clinical diagnosis of
why—“Severe traumas to brain and vital cranial structures
inflicted by a shotgun.”
Then Richard G. Rohleder took the stand.
Rohleder is Chief Investigator of the Garden City Police
Department. His hobby is photography, and he is good at
it. It was Rohleder who took the pictures that, when
developed, revealed Hickock’s dusty footprints in the
Clutter cellar, prints the camera could discern, though not
the human eye. And it was he who had photographed the
corpses, those death-scene images Alvin Dewey had
continuously pondered while the murders were still
unsolved. The point of Rohleder’s testimony was to
establish the fact of his having made these pictures, which
the prosecution proposed to put into evidence. But
Hickock’s attorney objected: “The sole reason the pictures
are being introduced is to prejudice and inflame the minds
of the jurors.” Judge Tate overruled the objection and
allowed the photographs into evidence, which meant they
must be shown to the jury.
While this was being done, Hickock’s father, addressing a
journalist seated near him, said, “The judge up there! I
never seen a man so prejudiced. Just no sense having a
trial. Not with him in charge. Why, that man was a
pallbearer at the funeral!” (Actually, Tate was but slightly
acquainted with the victims, and was not present at their
funeral in any capacity.) But Mr. Hickock’s was the only
voice raised in an exceedingly silent courtroom. Altogether,
there were seventeen prints, and as they were passed from
hand to hand, the jurors’ expressions reflected the impact
the pictures made: one man’s cheeks reddened, as if he
had been slapped, and a few, after the first distressing
glance, obviously had no heart for the task; it was as though
the photographs had prised open their mind’s eye, and
forced them to at last really see the true and pitiful thing that
had happened to a neighbor and his wife and children. It
amazed them, it made them angry, and several of them—
the pharmacist, the manager of the bowling alley—stared at
the defendants with total contempt.
The elder Mr. Hickock, wearily wagging his head, again
and again murmured, “No sense. Just no sense having a
trial.”
As the day’s final witness, the prosecution had promised to
produce a “mystery man.” It was the man who had supplied
the information that led to the arrest of the accused: Floyd
Wells, Hickock’s former cellmate. Because he was still
serving a sentence at Kansas State Penitentiary, and
therefore was in danger of retaliation from other inmates,
Wells had never been publicly identified as the informer.
Now, in order that he might safely testify at the trial, he had
been removed from the prison and lodged in a small jail in
an adjacent county. Nevertheless, Wells’ passage across
the courtroom toward the witness stand was oddly stealthy
—as though he expected to encounter an assassin along
the way—and, as he walked past Hickock, Hickock’s lips
writhed as he whispered a few atrocious words. Wells
pretended not to notice; but like a horse that has heard the
hum of a rattlesnake, he shied away from the betrayed
man’s venomous vicinity. Taking the stand, he stared
straight ahead, a somewhat chinless little farmboyish fellow
wearing a very decent dark-blue suit which the State of
Kansas had bought for the occasion—the state being
concerned that its most important witness should look
respectable, and consequently trustworthy.
Wells’ testimony, perfected by pre-trial rehearsal, was as
tidy as his appearance. Encouraged by the sympathetic
promptings of Logan Green, the witness acknowledged
that he had once, for approximately a year, worked as a
hired hand at River Valley Farm; he went on to say that
some ten years later, following his conviction on a burglary
charge, he had become friendly with another imprisoned
burglar, Richard Hickock, and had described to him the
Clutter farm and family.
“Now,” Green asked, “during your conversations with Mr.
Hickock what was said about Mr. Clutter by either of you?”
“Well, we talked quite a bit about Mr. Clutter. Hickock said
he was about to be paroled, and he was going to go West
looking for a job; he might stop to see Mr. Clutter to get a
job. Iwas telling him how wealthy Mr. Clutter was.”
“Did that seem to interest Mr. Hickock?”
“Well, he wanted to know if Mr. Clutter had a safe around
there.”
“Mr. Wells, did you think at the time there was a safe in the
Clutter house?”
“Well, it has been so long since Iworked out there. Ithought
there was a safe. Iknew there was a cabinet of some
kind. . . . The next thing Iknew he [Hickock] was talking
about robbing Mr. Clutter.”
“Did he tell you anything about how he was going to commit
the robbery?”
“He told me if he done anything like that he wouldn’t leave
no witnesses.”
“Did he actually say what he was going to do with the
witnesses?”
“Yes. He told me he would probably tie them up and then
rob them and then kill them.”
Having established premeditation of great degree, Green
left the witness to the ministrations of the defense. Old Mr.
Fleming, a classic country lawyer more happily at home
with land deeds than ill deeds, opened the cross-
examination. The intent of his queries, as he soon
established, was to introduce a subject the prosecution had
emphatically avoided: the question of Wells’ own role in the
murder plot, and his own moral liability.
“You didn’t,” Fleming said, hastening to the heart of the
matter, “say anything at all to Mr. Hickock to discourage
him from coming out here to rob and kill the Clutter family?”
“No. Anybody tells you anything about that up there [Kansas
State Penitentiary], you don’t pay any attention to it
because you think they are just talking anyway.”
“You mean you talked that way and didn’t mean anything?
Didn’t you mean to convey to him [Hickock] the idea that
Mr. Clutter had a safe? You wanted Mr. Hickock to believe
that, did you not?”
In his quiet way, Fleming was giving the witness a rough
time; Wells plucked at his tie, as though the knot was
suddenly too tight.
“And you meant for Mr. Hickock to believe that Mr. Clutter
had a lot of money, didn’t you?”
“Itold him Mr. Clutter had a lot of money, yes.”
Fleming once more elicited an account of how Hickock had
fully informed Wells of his violent plans for the Clutter family.
Then, as though veiled in a private grief, the lawyer wistfully
said, “And even after all of that you did nothing to
discourage him?”
“Ididn’t believe he’d do it.”
“You didn’t believe him. Then why, when you heard about
the thing that happened out here, why did you think he was
the one that was guilty?”
Wells cockily replied, “Because it was done just like he
said he was going to do!”
Harrison Smith, the younger half of the defense team, took
charge. Assuming an aggressive, sneering manner that
seemed forced, for really he is a mild and lenient man,
Smith asked the witness if he had a nickname.
“No. Ijust go by ‘Floyd.’ ”
The lawyer snorted. “Don’t they call you ‘Squealer’ now? Or
do they call you ‘Snitch’?”
“Ijust go by ‘Floyd,’ ” Wells repeated, rather hangdog.
“How many times have you been in jail?”
“About three times.”
“Some of those times for lying, were they?”
Denying it, the witness said that once he’d gone to jail for
driving without an operator’s license, that burglary was the
reason for his second incarceration, and the third, a ninety-
day hitch in an Army stockade, had been the outcome of
something that happened while he was a soldier: “We was
on a train trip guard. We got a little intoxicated on the train,
done a little extra shooting at some windows and lights.”
Everyone laughed; everyone except the defendants
(Hickock spat on the floor) and Harrison Smith, who now
asked Wells why, after learning of the Holcomb tragedy, he
had tarried several weeks before telling the authorities what
he knew. “Weren’t you,” he said, “waiting for something to
come out? Maybe like a reward?”
“No.”
“You didn’t hear anything about a reward?” The lawyer was
referring to the reward of one thousand dollars that had
been offered by the Hutchinson News, for information
resulting in the arrest and conviction of the Clutter
murderers.
“Iseen it in the paper.”
“That was before you went to the authorities, wasn’t it?” And
when the witness admitted that this was true, Smith
triumphantly continued by asking, “What kind of immunity
did the county attorney offer you for coming up here today
and testifying?”
But Logan Green protested: “We object to the form of the
question, Your Honor. There’s been no testimony about
immunity to anybody.” The objection was sustained, and the
witness dismissed; as he left the stand, Hickock
announced to everyone within earshot, “Sonofabitch.
Anybody ought to hang, he ought to hang. Look at him.
Gonna walk out of here and get that money and go scot-
free.”
This prediction proved correct, for not long afterward Wells
collected both the reward and a parole. But his good
fortune was short-lived. He was soon in trouble again, and,
over the years, has experienced many vicissitudes. At
present he is a resident of the Mississippi State Prison in
Parchman, Mississippi, where he is serving a thirty-year
sentence for armed robbery.
By Friday, when the court recessed for the weekend, the
state had completed its case, which included the
appearance of four Special Agents of the Federal Bureau
of Investigation in Washington, D.C. These men, laboratory
technicians skilled in various categories of scientific crime
detection, had studied the physical evidence connecting
the accused to the murders (blood samples, footprints,
cartridge shells, rope and tape), and each of them certified
the validity of the exhibits. Finally, the four K.B.I. agents
provided accounts of interviews with the prisoners, and of
the confessions eventually made by them. In cross-
examining the K.B.I. personnel, the defense attorneys, a
beleaguered pair, argued that the admissions of guilt had
been obtained by improper means—brutal interrogation in
sweltering, brightly lighted, closet-like rooms. The
allegation, which was untrue, irritated the detectives into
expounding very convincing denials. (Later, in reply to a
reporter who asked him why he had dogged this artificial
scent at such length, Hickock’s lawyer snapped, “What am I
supposed to do? Hell, I’m playing without any cards. But I
can’t just sit here like a dummy. I’ve got to sound off once in
a while.”)
The prosecution’s most damaging witness proved to be
Alvin Dewey; his testimony, the first public rendering of the
events detailed in Perry Smith’s confession, earned large
headlines (UNVEIL MUTE MURDER HORROR—Cold, Chilling
Facts Told), and shocked his listeners—none more so than
Richard Hickock, who came to a startled and chagrined
attention when, in the course of Dewey’s commentary, the
agent said, “There is one incident Smith related to me that I
haven’t as yet mentioned. And that was that after the Clutter
family was tied up, Hickock said to him how well built he
thought Nancy Clutter was, and that he was going to rape
her. Smith said he told Hickock there wasn’t going to be
anything like that go on. Smith told me he had no respect
for anyone who couldn’t control their sexual desires, and
that he would have fought Hickock before allowing him to
rape the Clutter girl.” Heretofore, Hickock had not known
that his partner had informed police of the proposed
assault; nor was he aware that, in a friendlier spirit, Perry
had altered his original story to claim that he alone had shot
the four victims—a fact revealed by Dewey as he neared
the end of his testimony: “Perry Smith told me he wished to
change two things in the statement he had given us. He
said everything else in that statement was true and correct.
Except these two things. And that was that he wanted to
say he killed Mrs. Clutter and Nancy Clutter—not Hickock.
He told me that Hickock. . . didn’t want to die with his
mother thinking he had killed any members of the Clutter
family. And he said the Hickocks were good people. So
why not have it that way.”
Hearing this, Mrs. Hickock wept. Throughout the trial she
had sat quietly beside her husband, her hands worrying a
rumpled handkerchief. As often as she could she caught
her son’s eye, nodded at him and simulated a smile which,
though flimsily constructed, affirmed her loyalty. But clearly
the woman’s control was exhausted; she began to cry. A
few spectators glanced at her, and glanced away,
embarrassed; the rest seemed oblivious of the raw dirge
counterpointing Dewey’s continuing recitation; even her
husband, perhaps because he believed it unmanly to take
notice, remained aloof. At last a woman reporter, the only
one present, led Mrs. Hickock out of the courtroom and into
the privacy of a ladies’ room.
Once her anguish had subsided, Mrs. Hickock expressed a
need to confide. “There’s nobody much Ican talk to,” she
told her companion. “Idon’t mean people haven’t been
kind, neighbors and all. And strangers, too—strangers have
wrote letters to say they know how hard it must be and how
sorry they are. Nobody’s said a mean word, either to Walter
or me. Not even here, where you might expect it. Everybody
here has gone out of their way to be friendly. The waitress
over at the place where we take our meals, she puts ice
cream on the pie and don’t charge for it. Itell her don’t, I
can’t eat it. Used to be Icould eat anything didn’t eat me
first. But she puts it on. To be nice. Sheila, that’s her, she
says it’s not our fault what happened. But it seems to me
like people are looking at me and thinking, Well, she must
be to blame somehow. The way Iraised Dick. Maybe Idid
do something wrong. Only Idon’t know what it could have
been; Iget headaches trying to remember. We’re plain
people, just country people, getting along the same as
everybody else. We had some good times at our house. I
taught Dick the foxtrot. Dancing, Iwas always crazy about it,
it was my whole life when Iwas a girl; and there was a boy,
gosh, he could dance like Christmas—we won a silver cup
waltzing together. For a long time we planned to run away
and go on the stage. Vaudeville. It was just a dream.
Children dreaming. He left town, and one day Imarried
Walter, and Walter Hickock couldn’t do step one. He said if
Iwanted a hoofer Ishould’ve married a horse. Nobody ever
danced with me again until Ilearned Dick, and he didn’t
take to it exactly, but he was sweet, Dick was the best-
natured little kid.”
Mrs. Hickock removed the spectacles she was wearing,
polished the smeared lenses and resettled them on her
pudgy, agreeable face. “There’s lots more to Dick than
what you hear back there in the courtroom. The lawyers
jabbering how terrible he is—no good at all. Ican’t make
any excuses for what he did, his part in it. I’m not forgetting
that family; Ipray for them every night. But Ipray for Dick,
too. And this boy Perry. It was wrong of me to hate him; I’ve
got nothing but pity for him now. And you know—Ibelieve
Mrs. Clutter would feel pity, too. Being the kind of woman
they say she was.”
Court had adjourned; the noises of the departing audience
clattered in the corridor beyond the lavatory door. Mrs.
Hickock said she must go and meet her husband. “He’s
dying. Idon’t think he minds any more.”
Many observers of the trial scene were baffled by the
visitor from Boston, Donald Cullivan. They could not quite
understand why this staid young Catholic, a successful
engineer who had taken his degree at Harvard, a husband
and the father of three children, should choose to befriend
an uneducated, homicidal half-breed whom he knew but
slightly and had not seen for nine years. Cullivan himself
said, “My wife doesn’t understand it either. Coming out
here was something Icouldn’t afford to do-it meant using a
week of my vacation, and money we really need for other
things. On the other hand, it was something Icouldn’t afford
not to do. Perry’s lawyer wrote me asking if Iwould be a
character witness; the moment Iread the letter Iknew Ihad
to do it. Because I’d offered this man my friendship. And
because—well, Ibelieve in the life everlasting. All souls can
be saved for God.”
The salvation of a soul, namely Perry Smith’s, was an
enterprise the deeply Catholic undersheriff and his wife
were eager to assist—although Mrs. Meier had been
rebuffed by Perry when she had suggested a consultation
with Father Goubeaux, a local priest. (Perry said, “Priests
and nuns have had their chance with me. I’m still wearing
the scars to prove it.”) And so, during the weekend recess,
the Meiers invited Cullivan to eat Sunday dinner with the
prisoner in his cell.
The opportunity to entertain his friend, play host as it were,
delighted Perry, and the planning of the menu—wild goose,
stuffed and roasted, with gravy and creamed potatoes and
string beans, aspic salad, hot biscuits, cold milk, freshly
baked cherry tarts, cheese, and coffee—seemed to
concern him more than the outcome of the trial (which, to be
sure, he did not consider a suspenseful matter: “Those
prairiebillys, they’ll vote to hang fast as pigs eat slop. Look
at their eyes. I’ll be damned if I’m the only killer in the
courtroom”). All Sunday morning he prepared to receive his
guest. The day was warm, a little windy, and leaf shadows,
supple emanations from the tree boughs that brushed the
cell’s barred window, tantalized Perry’s tamed squirrel. Big
Red chased the swaying patterns while his master swept
and dusted, scrubbed the floor and scoured the toilet and
cleared the desk of literary accumulations. The desk was to
be the dining table, and once Perry had finished setting it, it
looked most inviting, for Mrs. Meier had donated a linen
tablecloth, starched napkins, and her best china and silver.
Cullivan was impressed—he whistled when the feast,
arriving on trays, was placed upon the table-and before
sitting down, he asked the host if he might offer a blessing.
The host, head unbowed, cracked his knuckles as Cullivan,
with bowed head and palms together, intoned, “Bless us, O
Lord, and these thy gifts which we are about to receive from
thy bounty, through the mercy of Christ, our Lord. Amen.”
Perry murmuringly remarked that in his opinion any credit
due belonged to Mrs. Meier. “She did all the work. Well,” he
said, heaping his guest’s plate, “it’s good to see you, Don.
You look just the same. Haven’t changed a bit.”
Cullivan, in appearance a cautious bank clerk with depleted
hair and a face rather difficult to recall, agreed that
outwardly he hadn’t changed much. But his interior self, the
invisible man, was another matter: “Iwas coasting along.
Not knowing God is the only reality. Once you realize that,
then everything falls into place. Life has meaning—and so
does death. Boy, do you always eat like this?”
Perry laughed. “She’s really a terrific cook, Mrs. Meier. You
ought to taste her Spanish rice. I’ve gained fifteen pounds
since Igot here. Course Iwas on the thin side. I’d lost a lot
of weight while Dick and me were out on the road riding all
to hell and gone—hardly ever eating a square meal, hungry
as hell most of the time. Mostly, we lived like animals. Dick
was always stealing canned stuff out of grocery stores.
Baked beans and canned spaghetti. We’d open it up in the
car and gobble it cold. Animals. Dick loves to steal. It’s an
emotional thing with him—a sickness. I’m a thief too, but
only if Idon’t have the money to pay. Dick, if he was
carrying a hundred dollars in his pocket, he’d steal a stick
of chewing gum.”
Later, over cigarettes and coffee, Perry returned to the
subject of thievery. “My friend Willie-Jay used to talk about
it. He used to say that all crimes were only ‘varieties of
theft.’ Murder included. When you kill a man you steal his
life. Iguess that makes me a pretty big thief. See, Don—I
did kill them. Down there in court, old Dewey made it sound
like Iwas prevaricating—on account of Dick’s mother. Well,
Iwasn’t. Dick helped me, he held the flashlight and picked
up the shells. And it was his idea, too. But Dick didn’t shoot
them, he never could’ve—though he’s damn quick when it
comes to running down an old dog. Iwonder why Idid it.”
He scowled, as though the problem was new to him, a
newly unearthed stone of surprising, unclassified color. “I
don’t know why,” he said, as if holding it to the light, and
angling it now here, now there. “Iwas sore at Dick. The
tough brass boy. But it wasn’t Dick. Or the fear of being
identified. Iwas willing to take that gamble. And it wasn’t
because of anything the Clutters did. They never hurt me.
Like other people. Like people have all my life. Maybe it’s
just that the Clutters were the ones who had to pay for it.”
Cullivan probed, trying to gauge the depth of what he
assumed would be Perry’s contrition. Surely he must be
experiencing a remorse sufficiently profound to summon a
desire for God’s mercy and forgiveness? Perry said, “Am I
sorry? If that’s what you mean—I’m not. Idon’t feel anything
about it. Iwish Idid. But nothing about it bothers me a bit.
Half an hour after it happened, Dick was making jokes and I
was laughing at them. Maybe we’re not human. I’m human
enough to feel sorry for myself. Sorry Ican’t walk out of here
when you walk out. But that’s all.” Cullivan could scarcely
credit so detached an attitude; Perry was confused,
mistaken, it was not possible for any man to be that devoid
of conscience or compassion. Perry said, “Why? Soldiers
don’t lose much sleep. They murder, and get medals for
doing it. The good people of Kansas want to murder me—
and some hangman will be glad to get the work. It’s easy to
kill—a lot easier than passing a bad check. Just remember:
Ionly knew the Clutters maybe an hour. If I’d really known
them, Iguess I’d feel different. Idon’t think Icould live with
myself. But the way it was, it was like picking off targets in a
shooting gallery.”
Cullivan was silent, and his silence upset Perry, who
seemed to interpret it as implying disapproval. “Hell, Don,
don’t make me act the hypocrite with you. Throw a load of
bull—how sorry Iam, how all Iwant to do now is crawl on my
knees and pray. That stuff don’t ring with me. Ican’t accept
overnight what I’ve always denied. The truth is, you’ve done
more for me than any what you call God ever has. Or ever
will. By writing to me, by signing yourself ‘friend.’ When I
had no friends. Except Joe James.” Joe James, he
explained to Cullivan, was a young Indian logger with whom
he had once lived in a forest near Bellingham, Washington.
“That’s a long way from Garden City. A good two thousand
miles. Isent word to Joe about the trouble I’m in. Joe’s a
poor guy, he’s got seven kids to feed, but he promised to
come here if he had to walk. He hasn’t shown up yet, and
maybe he won’t, only Ithink he will. Joe always liked me.
Do you, Don?”
“Yes. Ilike you.”
Cullivan’s softly emphatic answer pleased and rather
flustered Perry. He smiled and said, “Then you must be
some kind of nut.” Suddenly rising, he crossed the cell and
picked up a broom. “Idon’t know why Ishould die among
strangers. Let a bunch of prairiebillys stand around and
watch me strangle. Shit. Iought to kill myself first.” He lifted
the broom and pressed the bristles against the light bulb
that burned in the ceiling. “Just unscrew the bulb and smash
it and cut my wrists. That’s what Iought to do. While you’re
still here. Somebody who cares about me a little bit.”
The trial resumed on Monday morning at ten o’clock.
Ninety minutes later the court adjourned, the case for the
defense having been completed in that brief time. The
defendants declined to testify in their own behalf, and
therefore the question of whether Hickock or Smith had
been the actual executioner of the Clutter family did not
arise.
Of the five witnesses who did appear, the first was the
hollow-eyed Mr. Hickock. Though he spoke with a dignified
and mournful clarity, he had but one contribution to make
that was relevant to a claim of temporary insanity. His son,
he said, had suffered head injuries in a car accident in July,
1950. Prior to the accident, Dick had been a “happy-go-
lucky boy,” had done well in school, been popular with his
classmates and considerate of his parents— “No trouble to
anybody.”
Harrison Smith, gently guiding the witness, said, “Iwill ask
you if, after July, 1950, you observed any change in the
personality and habits and actions of your son, Richard?”
“He just didn’t act like the same boy.”
“What were the changes you observed?”
Mr. Hickock, between pensive hesitations, listed several:
Dick was sulky and restless, he ran around with older men,
drank and gambled. “He just wasn’t the same boy.”
The last assertion was promptly challenged by Logan
Green, who undertook the cross-examination. “Mr. Hickock,
you say you never had any trouble with your son until after
1950?”
“. . . Ithink he got arrested in 1949.”
A citric smile bent Green’s tiny lips. “Remember what he
was arrested for?”
“He was accused of breaking into a drugstore.”
“Accused? Didn’t he admit that he broke into the store?”
“That’s right, he did.”
“And that was in 1949. Yet now you tell us your son had a
change in his attitude and conduct after 1950?”
“Iwould say so, yes.”
“You mean that after 1950 he became a good boy?”
Hard coughs agitated the old man; he spat into a
handkerchief. “No,” he said, studying the discharge. “I
wouldn’t say that.”
“Then what was the change that took place?”
“Well, that would be pretty hard to explain. He just didn’t act
like the same boy.”
“You mean he lost his criminal tendencies?”
The lawyer’s sally induced guffaws, a courtroom flare-up
that Judge Tate’s dour gaze soon extinguished. Mr.
Hickock, presently set free, was replaced on the stand by
Dr. W. Mitchell Jones.
Dr. Jones identified himself to the court as a “physician
specializing in the field of psychiatry,” and in support of his
qualifications, added that he had attended perhaps fifteen
hundred patients since 1956, the year he had entered a
psychiatric residency at Topeka State Hospital in Topeka,
Kansas. For the past two years he had served on the staff
of Larned State Hospital, where he was in charge of the
Dillon Building, a section reserved for the criminally insane.
Harrison Smith asked the witness, “Approximately how
many murderers have you dealt with?”
“About twenty-five.”
“Doctor, Iwould like to ask you if you know my client,
Richard Eugene Hickock?”
“Ido.”
“Have you had occasion to examine him professionally?”
“Yes, sir . . . Imade a psychiatric evaluation of Mr. Hickock.”
“Based upon your examination, do you have an opinion as
to whether or not Richard Eugene Hickock knew right from
wrong at the time of the commission of the crime?”
The witness, a stout man of twenty-eight with a moon-
shaped but intelligent, subtly delicate face, took a deep
breath, as though to equip himself for a prolonged reply—
which the judge then cautioned him he must not make: “You
may answer the question yes or no, Doctor. Limit your
answer to yes or no.”
“Yes.”
“And what is your opinion?”
“Ithink that within the usual definitions Mr. Hickock did know
right from wrong.”
Confined as he was by the M’Naghten Rule (“the usual
definitions”), a formula quite color-blind to any gradations
between black and white, Dr. Jones was impotent to
answer otherwise. But of course the response was a
letdown for Hickock’s attorney, who hopelessly asked, “Can
you qualify that answer?”
It was hopeless because though Dr. Jones agreed to
elaborate, the prosecution was entitled to object—and did,
citing the fact that Kansas law allowed nothing more than a
yes or no reply to the pertinent question. The objection was
upheld, and the witness dismissed. However, had Dr.
Jones been allowed to speak further, here is what he would
have testified: “Richard Hickock is above average in
intelligence, grasps new ideas easily and has a wide fund
of information. He is alert to what is happening around him,
and he shows no sign of mental confusion or disorientation.
His thinking is well organized and logical and he seems to
be in good contact with reality. Although Idid not find the
usual signs of organic brain damage—memory loss,
concrete concept formation, intellectual deterioration—this
cannot be completely ruled out. He had a serious head
injury with concussion and several hours of
unconsciousness in 1950—this was verified by me by
checking hospital records. He says he has had blackout
spells, periods of amnesia, and headaches ever since that
time, and a major portion of his antisocial behavior has
occurred since that time. He has never had the medical
tests which would definitely prove or disprove the existence
of residual brain damage. Definitive medical tests are
indicated before a complete evaluation can be said to
exist. . . . Hickock does show signs of emotional
abnormality. That he knew what he was doing and still went
ahead with it is possibly the most clear-cut demonstration
of this fact. He is a person who is impulsive in action, likely
to do things without thought of consequences or future
discomfort to himself or to others. He does not seem to be
capable of learning from experience, and he shows an
unusual pattern of intermittent periods of productive activity
followed by patently irresponsible actions. He cannot
tolerate feelings of frustration as a more normal person
can, and he is poorly able to rid himself of those feelings
except through antisocial activity. . . . His self-esteem is
very low, and he secretly feels inferior to others and sexually
inadequate. These feelings seem to be over-compensated
for by dreams of being rich and powerful, a tendency to
brag about his exploits, spending sprees when he has
money, and dissatisfaction with only the normal slow
advancement he could expect from his job. . . . He is
uncomfortable in his relationships to other people, and has
a pathological inability to form and hold enduring personal
attachments. Although he professes usual moral standards
he seems obviously uninfluenced by them in his actions. In
summary, he shows fairly typical characteristics of what
would psychiatrically be called a severe character disorder.
It is important that steps be taken to rule out the possibility
of organic brain damage, since, if present, it might have
substantially influenced his behavior during the past several
years and at the time of the crime.”
Aside from a formal plea to the jury, which would not take
place until the morrow, the psychiatrist’s testimony
terminated Hickock’s planned defense. Next it was the turn
of Arthur Fleming, Smith’s elderly counselor. He presented
four witnesses: the Reverend James E. Post, the
Protestant chaplain at Kansas State Penitentiary; Perry’s
Indian friend, Joe James, who after all had arrived by bus
that morning, having traveled a day and two nights from his
wilderness home in the Far Northwest; Donald Cullivan;
and, once again, Dr. Jones. Except for the latter, these men
were offered as “character witnesses”—persons expected
to attribute to the accused a few human virtues. They did
not fare very well, though each of them negotiated some
skimpily favorable remark before the protesting
prosecution, which contended that personal comments of
this nature were “incompetent, irrelevant, immaterial,”
hushed and banished them.
For example, Joe James, dark-haired, even darker-
skinned than Perry, a lithe figure who with his faded
huntsman’s shirt and moccasined feet looked as though he
had that instant mysteriously emerged from woodland
shadows, told the court that the defendant had lived with
him off and on for over two years. “Perry was a likable kid,
well liked around the neighborhood—he never done one
thing out of the way to my knowledge.” The state stopped
him there; and stopped Cullivan, too, when he said, “During
the time Iknew him in the Army, Perry was a very likable
fellow.”
The Reverend Post survived somewhat longer, for he made
no direct attempt to compliment the prisoner, but described
sympathetically an encounter with him at Lansing. “Ifirst
met Perry Smith when he came to my office in the prison
chapel with a picture he had painted—a head-and-
shoulders portrait of Jesus Christ done in pastel crayon. He
wanted to give it to me for use in the chapel. It’s been
hanging on the walls of my office ever since.”
Fleming said, “Do you have a photograph of that painting?”
The minister had an envelope full; but when he produced
them, ostensibly for distribution among the jurors, an
exasperated Logan Green leaped to his feet: “If Your Honor
please, this is going too far . . .” His Honor saw that it went
no further.
Dr. Jones was now recalled, and following the preliminaries
that had accompanied his original appearance, Fleming
put to him the crucial query: “From your conversations and
examination of Perry Edward Smith, do you have an
opinion as to whether he knew right from wrong at the time
of the offense involved in this action?” And once more the
court admonished the witness: “Answer yes or no, do you
have an opinion?”
“No.”
Amid surprised mutters, Fleming, surprised himself, said,
“You may state to the jury why you have no opinion.”
Green objected: “The man has no opinion, and that’s it.”
Which it was, legally speaking.
But had Dr. Jones been permitted to discourse on the
cause of his indecision, he would have testified: “Perry
Smith shows definite signs of severe mental illness. His
childhood, related to me and verified by portions of the
prison records, was marked by brutality and lack of concern
on the part of both parents. He seems to have grown up
without direction, without love, and without ever having
absorbed any fixed sense of moral values. . . . He is
oriented, hyperalert to things going on about him, and
shows no sign of confusion. He is above average in
intelligence, and has a good range of information
considering his poor educational background. . . . Two
features in his personality make-up stand out as particularly
pathological. The first is his ‘paranoid’ orientation toward
the world. He is suspicious and distrustful of others, tends
to feel that others discriminate against him, and feels that
others are unfair to him and do not understand him. He is
overly sensitive to criticisms that others make of him, and
cannot tolerate being made fun of. He is quick to sense
slight or insult in things others say, and frequently may
misinterpret well-meant communications. He feels he has
great need of friendship and understanding, but he is
reluctant to confide in others, and when he does, expects to
be misunderstood or even betrayed. In evaluating the
intentions and feelings of others, his ability to separate the
real situation from his own mental projections is very poor.
He not infrequently groups all people together as being
hypocritical, hostile, and deserving of whatever he is able to
do to them. Akin to this first trait is the second, an ever-
present, poorly controlled rage—easily triggered by any
feeling of being tricked, slighted, or labeled inferior by
others. For the most part, his rages in the past have been
directed at authority figures—father, brother, Army
sergeant, state parole officer—and have led to violent
assaultive behavior on several occasions. Both he and his
acquaintances have been aware of these rages, which he
says ‘mount up’ in him, and of the poor control he has over
them. When turned toward himself his anger has
precipitated ideas of suicide. The inappropriate force of his
anger and lack of ability to control or channel it reflect a
primary weakness of personality structure. . . . In addition to
these traits, the subject shows mild early signs of a
disorder of his thought processes. He has poor ability to
organize his thinking, he seems unable to scan or
summarize his thought, becoming involved and sometimes
lost in detail, and some of his thinking reflects a ‘magical’
quality, a disregard of reality. . . . He has had few close
emotional relationships with other people, and these have
not been able to stand small crises. He has little feeling for
others outside a very small circle of friends, and attaches
little real value to human life. This emotional detachment
and blandness in certain areas is other evidence of his
mental abnormality. More extensive evaluation would be
necessary to make an exact psychiatric diagnosis, but his
present personality structure is very nearly that of a
paranoid schizophrenic reaction.”
It is significant that a widely respected veteran in the field of
forensic psychiatry, Dr. Joseph Satten of the Menninger
Clinic in Topeka, Kansas, consulted with Dr. Jones and
endorsed his evaluations of Hickock and Smith. Dr. Satten,
who afterward gave the case close attention, suggests that
though the crime would not have occurred except for a
certain frictional interplay between the perpetrators, it was
essentially the act of Perry Smith, who, he feels, represents
a type of murderer described by him in an article: “Murder
Without Apparent Motive—A Study in Personality
Disorganization.”
The article, printed in The American Journal of Psychiatry
(July, 1960), and written in collaboration with three
colleagues, Karl Menninger, Irwin Rosen, and Martin
Mayman, states its aim at the outset: “In attempting to
assess the criminal responsibility of murderers, the law
tries to divide them (as it does all offenders) into two
groups, the ‘sane’ and the ‘insane.’ The ‘sane’ murderer is
thought of as acting upon rational motives that can be
understood, though condemned, and the ‘insane’ one as
being driven by irrational senseless motives. When rational
motives are conspicuous (for example, when a man kills for
personal gain) or when the irrational motives are
accompanied by delusions or hallucinations (for example, a
paranoid patient who kills his fantasied persecutor), the
situation presents little problem to the psychiatrist. But
murderers who seem rational, coherent, and controlled, and
yet whose homicidal acts have a bizarre, apparently
senseless quality, pose a difficult problem, if courtroom
disagreements and contradictory reports about the same
offender are an index. It is our thesis that the
psychopathology of such murderers forms at least one
specific syndrome which we shall describe. In general,
these individuals are predisposed to severe lapses in ego-
control which makes possible the open expression of
primitive violence, born out of previous, and now
unconscious, traumatic experiences.”
The authors, as part of an appeals process, had examined
four men convicted of seemingly unmotivated murders. All
had been examined prior to their trials, and found to be
“without psychosis” and “sane.” Three of the men were
under death sentence, and the fourth was serving a long
prison sentence. In each of these cases, further psychiatric
investigation had been requested because someone—
either the lawyer, a relative, or a friend—was dissatisfied
with the psychiatric explanations previously given, and in
effect had asked, “How can a person as sane as this man
seems to be commit an act as crazy as the one he was
convicted of?” After describing the four criminals and their
crimes (a Negro soldier who mutilated and dismembered a
prostitute, a laborer who strangled a fourteen-year-old boy
when the boy rejected his sexual advances, an Army
corporal who bludgeoned to death another young boy
because he imagined the victim was making fun of him,
and a hospital employee who drowned a girl of nine by
holding her head under water), the authors surveyed the
areas of similarity. The men themselves, they wrote, were
puzzled as to why they killed their victims, who were
relatively unknown to them, and in each instance the
murderer appears to have lapsed into a dreamlike
dissociative trance from which he awakened to “suddenly
discover” himself assaulting his victim. “The most uniform,
and perhaps the most significant, historical finding was a
long-standing, sometimes lifelong, history of erratic control
over aggressive impulses. For example, three of the men,
throughout their lives, had been frequently involved in fights
which were not ordinary altercations, and which would have
become homicidal assaults if not stopped by others.”
Here, in excerpt, are a number of other observations
contained in the study: “Despite the violence in their lives,
all of the men had ego-images of themselves as physically
inferior, weak, and inadequate. The histories revealed in
each a severe degree of sexual inhibition. To all of them,
adult women were threatening creatures, and in two cases
there was overt sexual perversion. All of them, too, had
been concerned throughout their early years about being
considered ‘sissies,’ physically undersized or sickly. . . . In
all four cases, there was historical evidence of altered
states of consciousness, frequently in connection with the
outbursts of violence. Two of the men reported severe
dissociative trancelike states during which violent and
bizarre behavior was seen, while the other two reported
less severe, and perhaps less well-organized, amnesiac
episodes. During moments of actual violence, they often felt
separated or isolated from themselves, as if they were
watching someone else. . . . Also seen in the historical
background of all the cases was the occurrence of extreme
parental violence during childhood. . . . One man said he
was ‘whipped every time Iturned around.’ . . . Another of the
men had many violent beatings in order to ‘break’ him of
his stammering and ‘fits,’ as well as to correct him for his
allegedly ‘bad’ behavior. . . . The history relating to extreme
violence, whether fantasied, observed in reality, or actually
experienced by the child, fits in with the psychoanalytic
hypothesis that the child’s exposure to overwhelming
stimuli, before he can master them, is closely linked to early
defects in ego formation and later severe disturbances in
impulse control. In all of these cases, there was evidence of
severe emotional deprivation in early life. This deprivation
may have involved prolonged or recurrent absence of one
or both parents, a chaotic family life in which the parents
were unknown, or an outright rejection of the child by one or
both parents with the child being raised by others. . . .
Evidence of disturbances in affect organization was seen.
Most typically the men displayed a tendency not to
experience anger or rage in association with violent
aggressive action. None reported feelings of rage in
connection with the murders, nor did they experience anger
in any strong or pronounced way, although each of them
was capable of enormous and brutal aggression. . . . Their
relationships with others were of a shallow, cold nature,
lending a quality of loneliness and isolation to these men.
People were scarcely real to them, in the sense of being
warmly or positively (or even angrily) felt about. . . . The
three men under sentence of death had shallow emotions
regarding their own fate and that of their victims. Guilt,
depression, and remorse were strikingly absent. . . . Such
individuals can be considered to be murder-prone in the
sense of either carrying a surcharge of aggressive energy
or having an unstable ego defense system that periodically
allows the naked and archaic expression of such energy.
The murderous potential can become activated, especially
if some disequilibrium is already present, when the victim-
to-be is unconsciously perceived as a key figure in some
past traumatic configuration. The behavior, or even the
mere presence, of this figure adds a stress to the unstable
balance of forces that results in a sudden extreme
discharge of violence, similar to the explosion that takes
place when a percussion cap ignites a charge of
dynamite. . . . The hypothesis of unconscious motivation
explains why the murderers perceived innocuous and
relatively unknown victims as provocative and thereby
suitable targets for aggression. But why murder? Most
people, fortunately, do not respond with murderous
outbursts even under extreme provocation. The cases
described, on the other hand, were predisposed to gross
lapses in reality contact and extreme weakness in impulse
control during periods of heightened tension and
disorganization. At such times, a chance acquaintance or
even a stranger was easily able to lose his ‘real’ meaning
and assume an identity in the unconscious traumatic
configuration. The ‘old’ conflict was reactivated and
aggression swiftly mounted to murderous proportions. . . .
When such senseless murders occur, they are seen to be
an end result of a period of increasing tension and
disorganization in the murderer starting before the contact
with the victim who, by fitting into the unconscious conflicts
of the murderer, unwittingly serves to set into motion his
homicidal potential.”
Because of the many parallels between the background
and personality of Perry Smith and the subjects of his study,
Dr. Satten feels secure in assigning him to a position
among their ranks. Moreover, the circumstances of the
crime seem to him to fit exactly the concept of “murder
without apparent motive.” Obviously, three of the murders
Smith committed were logically motivated—Nancy, Kenyon,
and their mother had to be killed because Mr. Clutter had
been killed. But it is Dr. Satten’s contention that only the
first murder matters psychologically, and that when Smith
attacked Mr. Clutter he was under a mental eclipse, deep
inside a schizophrenic darkness, for it was not entirely a
flesh-and-blood man he “suddenly discovered” himself
destroying, but “a key figure in some past traumatic
configuration”: his father? the orphanage nuns who had
derided and beaten him? the hated Army sergeant? the
parole officer who had ordered him to “stay out of Kansas”?
One of them, or all of them.
In his confession, Smith said, “Ididn’t want to harm the
man. Ithought he was a very nice gentleman. Softspoken. I
thought so right up to the moment Icut his throat.” While
talking to Donald Cullivan, Smith said, “They [the Clutters]
never hurt me. Like other people. Like people have all my
life. Maybe it’s just that the Clutters were the ones who had
to pay for it.”
So it would appear that by independent paths, both the
professional and the amateur analyst reached conclusions
not dissimilar.
The aristocracy of Finney County had snubbed the trial. “It
doesn’t do,” announced the wife of one rich rancher, “to
seem curious about that sort of thing.” Nevertheless, the
trial’s last session found a fair segment of the local
Establishment seated alongside the plainer citizenry. Their
presence was a courteous gesture toward Judge Tate and
Logan Green, esteemed members of their own order. Also,
a large contingent of out-of-town lawyers, many of whom
had journeyed great distances, filled several benches;
specifically, they were on hand to hear Green’s final
address to the jury. Green, a suavely tough little
septuagenarian, has an imposing reputation among his
peers, who admire his stagecraft—a repertoire of actorish
gifts that includes a sense of timing acute as a night-club
comedian’s. An expert criminal lawyer, his usual role is that
of defender, but in this instance the state had retained him
as a special assistant to Duane West, for it was felt that the
young county attorney was too unseasoned to prosecute
the case without experienced support.
But like most star turns, Green was the last act on the
program. Judge Tate’s level-headed instructions to the jury
preceded him, as did the county attorney’s summation:
“Can there be a single doubt in your minds regarding the
guilt of these defendants? No! Regardless of who pulled
the trigger on Richard Eugene Hickock’s shotgun, both
men are equally guilty. There is only one way to assure that
these men will never again roam the towns and cities of this
land. We request the maximum penalty—death. This
request is made not in vengeance, but in all
humbleness. . . .”
Then the pleas of the defense attorneys had to be heard.
Fleming’s speech, described by one journalist as “soft-sell,”
amounted to a mild churchly sermon: “Man is not an animal.
He has a body, and he has a soul that lives forever. Idon’t
believe man has the right to destroy that house, a temple, in
which the soul dwells. . . .” Harrison Smith, though he too
appealed to the jurors’ presumed Christianity, took as his
main theme the evils of capital punishment: “It is a relic of
human barbarism. The law tells us that the taking of human
life is wrong, then goes ahead and sets the example. Which
is almost as wicked as the crime it punished. The state has
no right to inflict it. It isn’t effective. It doesn’t deter crime,
but merely cheapens human life and gives rise to more
murders. All we ask is mercy. Surely life imprisonment is
small mercy to ask. . . .” Not everyone was attentive; one
juror, as though poisoned by the numerous spring-fever
yawns weighting the air, sat with drugged eyes and jaws so
utterly ajar bees could have buzzed in and out.
Green woke them up. “Gentlemen,” he said, speaking
without notes, “you have just heard two energetic pleas for
mercy in behalf of the defendants. It seems to me fortunate
that these admirable attorneys, Mr. Fleming and Mr. Smith,
were not at the Clutter house that fateful night—very
fortunate for them that they were not present to plead mercy
for the doomed family. Because had they been there—well,
come next morning we would have had more than four
corpses to count.”
As a boy in his native Kentucky, Green was called Pinky, a
nickname he owed to his freckled coloring; now, as he
strutted before the jury, the stress of his assignment
warmed his face and splotched it with patches of pink. “I
have no intention of engaging in theological debate. But I
anticipated that defense counsel would use the Holy Bible
as an argument against the death penalty. You have heard
the Bible quoted. But I can read, too.” He slapped open a
copy of the Old Testament. “And here are a few things the
Good Book has to say on the subject. In Exodus Twenty,
Verse Thirteen, we have one of the Ten Commandments:
‘Thou shalt not kill.’ This refers to unlawful killing. Of course
it does, because in the next chapter, Verse Twelve, the
penalty for disobedience of that Commandment reads: ‘He
that smiteth a man, so that he die, shall be surely put to
death.’ Now, Mr. Fleming would have you believe that all
this was changed by the coming of Christ. Not so. For
Christ says, ‘Think not that Iam come to destroy the law, or
the prophets: Iam not come to destroy, but to fulfill.’ And
finally—” Green fumbled, and seemed to accidentally shut
the Bible, whereupon the visiting legal dignitaries grinned
and nudged each other, for this was a venerable courtroom
ploy—the lawyer who while reading from the Scriptures
pretends to lose his place, and then remarks, as Green
now did, “Never mind. Ithink Ican quote from memory.
Genesis Nine, Verse Six: ‘Whoso sheddeth man’s blood,
by man shall his blood be shed.’
“But,” Green went on, “Isee nothing to be gained by arguing
the Bible. Our state provides that the punishment for murder
in the first degree shall be imprisonment for life or death by
hanging. That is the law. You, gentlemen, are here to
enforce it. And if ever there was a case in which the
maximum penalty was justified, this is it. These were
strange, ferocious murders. Four of your fellow citizens
were slaughtered like hogs in a pen. And for what reason?
Not out of vengeance or hatred. But for money. Money. It
was the cold and calculated weighing of so many ounces of
silver against so many ounces of blood. And how cheaply
those lives were bought! For forty dollars’ worth of loot! Ten
dollars a life!” He whirled, and pointed a finger that moved
back and forth between Hickock and Smith. “They went
armed with a shotgun and a dagger. They went to rob and
kill—” His voice trembled, toppled, disappeared, as though
strangled by the intensity of his own loathing for the
debonair, gum-chewing defendants. Turning again to the
jury, he hoarsely asked, “What are you going to do? What
are you going to do with these men that bind a man hand
and foot and cut his throat and blow out his brains? Give
them the minimum penalty? Yes, and that’s only one of four
counts. What about Kenyon Clutter, a young boy with his
whole life before him, tied helplessly in sight of his father’s
death struggle. Or young Nancy Clutter, hearing the
gunshots and knowing her time was next. Nancy, begging
for her life: ‘Don’t. Oh, please don’t. Please. Please.’ What
agony! What unspeakable torture! And there remains the
mother, bound and gagged and having to listen as her
husband, her beloved children died one by one. Listen until
at last the killers, these defendants before you, entered her
room, focused a flashlight in her eyes, and let the blast of a
shotgun end the existence of an entire household.”
Pausing, Green gingerly touched a boil on the back of his
neck, a mature inflammation that seemed, like its angry
wearer, about to burst. “So, gentlemen, what are you going
to do? Give them the minimum? Send them back to the
penitentiary, and take the chance of their escaping or being
paroled? The next time they go slaughtering it may be your
family. Isay to you,” he solemnly said, staring at the panel in
a manner that encompassed and challenged them all,
“some of our enormous crimes only happen because once
upon a time a pack of chickenhearted jurors refused to do
their duty. Now, gentlemen, Ileave it to you and your
consciences.”
He sat down. West whispered to him, “That was masterly,
sir.”
But a few of Green’s auditors were less enthusiastic; and
after the jury retired to discuss the verdict, one of them, a
young reporter from Oklahoma, exchanged sharp words
with another newsman, Richard Parr of the Kansas City
Star. To the Oklahoman, Green’s address had seemed
“rabble-rousing, brutal.”
“He was just telling the truth,” Parr said. “The truth can be
brutal. To coin a phrase.”
“But he didn’t have to hit that hard. It’s unfair.”
“What’s unfair?”
“The whole trial. These guys don’t stand a chance.”
“Fat chance they gave Nancy Clutter.”
“Perry Smith. My God. He’s had such a rotten life—”
Parr said, “Many a man can match sob stories with that little
bastard. Me included. Maybe Idrink too much, but Isure as
hell never killed four people in cold blood.”
“Yeah, and how about hanging the bastard? That’s pretty
goddam cold-blooded too.”
The Reverend Post, overhearing the conversation, joined
in. “Well,” he said, passing around a snapshot reproduction
of Perry Smith’s portrait of Jesus, “any man who could paint
this picture can’t be one hundred percent bad. All the same
it’s hard to know what to do. Capital punishment is no
answer: it doesn’t give the sinner time enough to come to
God. Sometimes Idespair.” A jovial fellow with gold-filled
teeth and a silvery widows peak, he jovially repeated,
“Sometimes Idespair. Sometimes Ithink old Doc Savage
had the right idea.” The Doc Savage to whom he referred
was a fictional hero popular among adolescent readers of
pulp magazines a generation ago. “If you boys remember,
Doc Savage was a kind of superman. He’d made himself
proficient in every field—medicine, science, philosophy, art.
There wasn’t much old Doc didn’t know or couldn’t do. One
of his projects was, he decided to rid the world of criminals.
First he bought a big island out in the ocean. Then he and
his assistants—he had an army of trained assistants—
kidnaped all the world’s criminals and brought them to the
island. And Doc Savage operated on their brains. He
removed the part that holds wicked thoughts. And when
they recovered they were all decent citizens. They couldn’t
commit crimes because that part of their brain was out.
Now it strikes me that surgery of this nature might really be
the answer to—”
A bell, the signal that the jury was returning, interrupted him.
The jury’s deliberations had lasted forty minutes. Many
spectators, anticipating a swift decision, had never left their
seats. Judge Tate, however, had to be fetched from his
farm, where he had gone to feed his horses. A hurriedly
donned black robe billowed about him when at last he
arrived, but it was with impressive sedateness and dignity
that he asked, “Gentlemen of the jury, have you reached
your verdicts?” Their foreman replied: “We have, Your
Honor.” The court bailiff carried the sealed verdicts to the
bench.
Train whistles, the fanfare of an approaching Santa Fe
express, penetrated the courtroom. Tate’s bass voice
interlaced with the locomotive’s cries as he read: “ ‘Count
One. We the jury find the defendant, Richard Eugene
Hickock, guilty of murder in the first degree, and the
punishment is death.’ ” Then, as though interested in their
reaction, he looked down upon the prisoners, who stood
before him handcuffed to guards; they stared back
impassively until he resumed and read the seven counts
that followed: three more convictions for Hickock, and four
for Smith.
“—and the punishment is death”; each time he came to the
sentence, Tate enunciated it with a dark-toned hollowness
that seemed to echo the train’s mournful, now fading call.
Then he dismissed the jury (“You have performed a
courageous service”), and the condemned men were led
away. At the door, Smith said to Hickock, “No chicken-
hearted jurors, they!” They both laughed loudly, and a
cameraman photographed them. The picture appeared in a
Kansas paper above a caption entitled: “The Last Laugh?”
Aweek later Mrs. Meier was sitting in her parlor talking to a
friend. “Yes, it’s turned quiet around here,” she said. “I
guess we ought to be grateful things have settled down. But
Istill feel bad about it. Inever had much truck with Dick, but
Perry and Igot to know each other real well. That afternoon,
after he heard the verdict and they brought him back up
here—Ishut myself in the kitchen to keep from having to
see him. Isat by the kitchen window and watched the crowd
leaving the courthouse. Mr. Cullivan—he looked up and
saw me and waved. The Hickocks. All going away. Just this
morning Ihad a lovely letter from Mrs. Hickock; she visited
with me several times while the trial was going on, and I
wished Icould have helped her, only what can you say to
someone in a situation like that? But after everybody had
gone, and I’d started to wash some dishes—Iheard him
crying. Iturned on the radio. Not to hear him. But Icould.
Crying like a child. He’d never broke down before, shown
any sign of it. Well, Iwent to him. The door of his cell. He
reached out his hand. He wanted me to hold his hand, and I
did, Iheld his hand, and all he said was, ‘I’m embraced by
shame.’ Iwanted to send for Father Goubeaux—Isaid first
thing tomorrow I’d make him Spanish rice—but he just held
my hand tighter.
“And that night, of all nights, we had to leave him alone.
Wendle and Ialmost never go out, but we had a long-
standing engagement, and Wendle didn’t think we ought to
break it. But I’ll always be sorry we left him alone. Next day I
did fix the rice. He wouldn’t touch it. Or hardly speak to me.
He hated the whole world. But the morning the men came to
take him to the penitentiary, he thanked me and gave me a
picture of himself. A little Kodak made when he was sixteen
years old. He said it was how he wanted me to remember
him, like the boy in the picture.
“The bad part was saying goodbye. When you knew where
he was going, and what would happen to him. That squirrel
of his, he sure misses Perry. Keeps coming to the cell
looking for him. I’ve tried to feed him, but he won’t have
anything to do with me. It was just Perry he liked.”
Prisons are important to the economy of Leavenworth
County, Kansas. The two state penitentiaries, one for each
sex, are situated there; so is Leavenworth, the largest
Federal prison, and, at Fort Leavenworth, the country’s
principal military prison, the grim United States Army and
Air Force Disciplinary Barracks. If all the inmates in these
institutions were let free, they could populate a small city.
The oldest of the prisons is the Kansas State Penitentiary
for Men, a turreted black-and-white palace that visually
distinguishes an otherwise ordinary rural town, Lansing.
Built during the Civil War, it received its first resident in
1864. Nowadays the convict population averages around
two thousand; the present warden, Sherman H. Crouse,
keeps a chart which lists the daily total according to race
(for example, White 1405, Colored 360, Mexicans 12,
Indians 6). Whatever his race, each convict is a citizen of a
stony village that exists within the prison’s steep, machine-
gun-guarded walls—twelve gray acres of cement streets
and cell blocks and workshops.
In a south section of the prison compound there stands a
curious little building: a dark two-storied building shaped
like a coffin. This establishment, officially called the
Segregation and Isolation Building, constitutes a prison
inside a prison. Among the inmates, the lower floor is
known as The Hole—the place to which difficult prisoners,
the “hardrock” troublemakers, are now and then banished.
The upper story is reached by climbing a circular iron
staircase; at the top is Death Row.
The first time the Clutter murderers ascended the staircase
was late one rainy April afternoon. Having arrived at
Lansing after an eight-hour, four-hundred-mile car ride from
Garden City, the newcomers had been stripped, showered,
given close haircuts, and supplied with coarse denim
uniforms and soft slippers (in most American prisons such
slippers are a condemned man’s customary footwear); then
armed escorts marched them through a wet twilight to the
coffin-shaped edifice, hustled them up the spiral stairs and
into two of the twelve side-by-side cells that comprise
Lansing’s Death Row.
The cells are identical. They measure seven by ten feet,
and are unfurnished except for a cot, a toilet, a basin, and
an overhead light bulb that is never extinguished night or
day. The cell windows are very narrow, and not only barred
but covered with a wire mesh black as a widow’s veil; thus
the faces of those sentenced to hang can be but hazily
discerned by passers-by. The doomed themselves can see
out well enough; what they see is an empty dirt lot that
serves in summer as a baseball diamond, beyond the lot a
piece of prison wall, and above that, a piece of sky.
The wall is made of rough stone; pigeons nest inside its
crevices. A rusty iron door, set into the part of the wall
visible to the Row’s occupants, rouses the pigeons
whenever it is opened, puts them in a flap, for the hinges
creak so, scream. The door leads into a cavernous storage
room, where on even the warmest day the air is moist and
chilly. A number of things are kept there: stockpiles of metal
used by the convicts to manufacture automobile license
plates, lumber, old machinery, baseball paraphernalia—
and also an unpainted wooden gallows that smells faintly of
pine. For this is the state’s execution chamber; when a man
is brought here to be hanged, the prisoners say he has
“gone to The Corner,” or, alternatively, “paid a visit to the
warehouse.”
In accordance with the sentence of the court, Smith and
Hickock were scheduled to visit the warehouse six weeks
hence: at one minute after midnight on Friday, May 13,
1960.
Kansas abolished capital punishment in 1907; in 1935,
due to a sudden prevalence in the Midwest of rampaging
professional criminals (Alvin “Old Creepy” Karpis, Charles
“Pretty Boy” Floyd, Clyde Barrow and his homicidal
sweetheart, Bonnie Parker), the state legislators voted to
restore it. However, it was not until 1944 that an executioner
had a chance to employ his craft; over the next ten years he
was given nine additional opportunities. But for six years, or
since 1954, there had been no pay checks for a hangman
in Kansas (except at the Army and Air Force Disciplinary
Barracks, which also has a gallows). The late George
Docking, Governor of Kansas from 1957 through 1960,
was responsible for this hiatus, for he was unreservedly
opposed to the death penalty (“Ijust don’t like killing
people”).
Now, at that time—April, 1960—there were in United
States prisons one hundred and ninety persons awaiting
civil execution; five, the Clutter killers included, were among
the lodgers at Lansing. Occasionally, important visitors to
the prison are invited to take what one high official calls “a
little peek at Death Row.” Those who accept are assigned
a guard who, as he leads the tourist along the iron walkway
fronting the death cells, is likely to identify the condemned
with what he must consider comic formality. “And this,” he
said to a visitor in 1960, “this is Mr. Perry Edward Smith.
Now next door, that’s Mr. Smith’s buddy, Mr. Richard
Eugene Hickock. And over here we have Mr. Earl Wilson.
And after Mr. Wilson—meet Mr. Bobby Joe Spencer. And
as for this last gentleman, I’m sure you recognize the
famous Mr. Lowell Lee Andrews.”
Earl Wilson, a husky, hymn-singing Negro, had been
sentenced to die for the kidnaping, rape, and torture of a
young white woman; the victim, though she survived, was
left severely disabled. Bobby Joe Spencer, white, an
effeminate youth, had confessed to murdering an elderly
Kansas City woman, the owner of a rooming house where
he lived. Prior to leaving office in January, 1961, Governor
Docking, who had been defeated for re-election (in large
measure because of his attitude toward capital
punishment), commuted the sentences of both these men
to life imprisonment, which generally meant that they could
apply for parole in seven years. However, Bobby Joe
Spencer soon killed again: stabbed with a shiv another
young convict, his rival for the affections of an older inmate
(as one prison officer said, “Just two punks fighting over a
jocker”). This deed earned Spencer a second life sentence.
But the public was not much aware of either Wilson or
Spencer; compared to Smith and Hickock, or the fifth man
on the Row, Lowell Lee Andrews, the press had rather
slighted them.
Two years earlier Lowell Lee Andrews, an enormous,
weak-eyed boy of eighteen who wore horn-rimmed glasses
and weighed almost three hundred pounds, had been a
sophomore at the University of Kansas, an honor student
majoring in biology. Though he was a solitary creature,
withdrawn and seldom communicative, his acquaintances,
both at the university and in his home town of Wolcott,
Kansas, regarded him as exceptionally gentle and “sweet-
natured” (later one Kansas paper printed an article about
him entitled: “The Nicest Boy in Wolcott”). But inside the
quiet young scholar there existed a second, unsuspected
personality, one with stunted emotions and a distorted mind
through which cold thoughts flowed in cruel directions. His
family—his parents and a slightly older sister, Jennie
Marie-would have been astounded had they known the
daydreams Lowell Lee dreamed throughout the summer
and autumn of 1958; the brilliant son, the adored brother,
was planning to poison them all.
The elder Andrews was a prosperous farmer; he had not
much money in the bank, but he owned land valued at
approximately two hundred thousand dollars. A desire to
inherit this estate was ostensibly the motivation behind
Lowell Lee’s plot to destroy his family. For the secret Lowell
Lee, the one concealed inside the shy churchgoing biology
student, fancied himself an ice-hearted master criminal: he
wanted to wear gangsterish silk shirts and drive scarlet
sports cars; he wanted to be recognized as no mere
bespectacled, bookish, overweight, virginal schoolboy; and
while he did not dislike any member of his family, at least
not consciously, murdering them seemed the swiftest, most
sensible way of implementing the fantasies that possessed
him. Arsenic was the weapon he decided upon; after
poisoning the victims, he meant to tuck them in their beds
and burn down the house, in the hope that investigators
would believe the deaths accidental. However, one detail
perturbed him: suppose autopsies revealed the presence
of arsenic? And suppose the purchase of the poison could
be traced to him? Toward the end of summer he evolved
another plan. He spent three months polishing it. Finally,
there came a near-zero November night when he was
ready to act.
It was Thanksgiving week, and Lowell Lee was home for
the holidays, as was Jennie Marie, an intelligent but rather
plain girl who attended a college in Oklahoma. On the
evening of November 28, somewhere around seven,
Jennie Marie was sitting with her parents in the parlor
watching television; Lowell Lee was locked in his bedroom
reading the last chapter of The Brothers Karamazov. That
task completed, he shaved, changed into his best suit, and
proceeded to load both a semi-automatic .22-caliber rifle
and a Ruger .22-caliber revolver. He fitted the revolver into
a hip holster, shouldered the rifle, and ambled down a hall
to the parlor, which was dark except for the flickering
television screen. He switched on a light, aimed the rifle,
pulled the trigger, and hit his sister between the eyes, killing
her instantly. He shot his mother three times, and his father
twice. The mother, eyes gaping, arms outstretched,
staggered toward him; she tried to speak, her mouth
opened, closed, but Lowell Lee said: “Shut up.” To be
certain she obeyed him, he shot her three times more. Mr.
Andrews, however, was still alive; sobbing, whimpering, he
thrashed along the floor toward the kitchen, but at the
kitchen’s threshold the son unholstered his revolver and
discharged every chamber, then reloaded the weapon and
emptied it again; altogether, his father absorbed seventeen
bullets.
Andrews, according to statements credited to him, “didn’t
feel anything about it. The time came, and Iwas doing what
Ihad to do. That’s all there was to it.” After the shootings he
raised a window in his bedroom and removed the screen,
then roamed the house rifling dresser drawers and
scattering the contents: it was his intention to blame the
crime on thieves. Later, driving his father’s car, he traveled
forty miles over snow-slippery roads to Lawrence, the town
where the University of Kansas is located; en route, he
parked on a bridge, dismantled his lethal artillery, and
disposed of it by dropping the parts into the Kansas River.
But of course the journey’s true purpose was to arrange an
alibi. First he stopped at the campus house where he
roomed; he talked with the landlady, told her that he had
come to pick up his typewriter, and that because of the bad
weather the trip from Wolcott to Lawrence had taken two
hours. Departing, he visited a movie theater, where,
uncharacteristically, he chatted with an usher and a candy
vendor. At eleven, when the movie let out, he returned to
Wolcott. The family’s mongrel dog was waiting on the front
porch; it was whining with hunger, so Lowell Lee, entering
the house and stepping across his father’s corpse,
prepared a bowl of warm milk and mush; then, while the
dog was lapping it up, he telephoned the sheriff’s office and
said, “My name is Lowell Lee Andrews. Ilive at 6040
Wolcott Drive, and Iwant to report a robbery—”
Four officers of the Wyandotte County Sheriff’s Patrol
responded. One of the group, Patrolman Meyers,
described the scene as follows: “Well, it was one in the
morning when we got there. All the lights in the house was
on. And this big dark-haired boy, Lowell Lee, he was sitting
on the porch petting his dog. Patting it on the head.
Lieutenant Athey asked the boy what happened, and he
pointed to the door, real casual, and said, ‘Look in there.’ ”
Having looked, the astonished officers summoned the
county coroner, a gentleman who was also impressed by
young Andrews’ callous nonchalance, for when the coroner
asked him what funeral arrangements he wished to have
made, Andrews replied with a shrug, “I don’t care what you
do with them.”
Shortly, two senior detectives appeared and began to
question the family’s lone survivor. Though convinced he
was lying, the detectives listened respectfully to the tale of
how he had driven to Lawrence to fetch a typewriter, gone
to a movie, and arrived home after midnight to find the
bedrooms ransacked and his family slain. He stayed with
the story, and might never have altered it if, subsequent to
his arrest and removal to the county jail, the authorities had
not obtained the aid of the Reverend Mr. Virto C. Dameron.
The Reverend Dameron, a Dickensian personage, an
unctuous and jolly brimstone-and-damnation orator, was
minister of the Grandview Baptist Church in Kansas City,
Kansas, the church the Andrews family attended regularly.
Awakened by an urgent call from the county coroner,
Dameron presented himself at the jail around 3:00 A.M.,
whereupon detectives, who had been strenuously but
abortively interrogating the suspect, withdrew to another
room, leaving the minister to consult privately with his
parishioner. It proved a fatal interview for the latter, who
many months afterward gave this account of it to a friend:
“Mr. Dameron said, ‘Now, Lee, I’ve known you all your life.
Since you were just a little tadpole. And Iknew your daddy
all his life, we grew up together, we were childhood friends.
And that’s why I’m here—not just because I’m your minister,
but because Ifeel like you’re a member of my own family.
And because you need a friend that you can talk to and
trust. And Ifeel terrible about this terrible event, and I’m
every bit as anxious as you are to see the guilty party
caught and punished.’
“He wanted to know was Ithirsty, and Iwas, so he got me a
Coke, and after that he’s going on about the Thanksgiving
vacation and how do Ilike school, when all of a sudden he
says, ‘Now, Lee, there seems to be some doubt among the
people here regarding your innocence. I’m sure you’d be
willing to take a lie detector and convince these men of your
innocence so they can get busy and catch the guilty party.’
Then he said, ‘Lee, you didn’t do this terrible thing, did you?
If you did, now is the time to purge your soul.’ The next thing
was, Ithought what difference does it make, and Itold him
the truth, most everything about it. He kept wagging his
head and rolling his eyes and rubbing his hands together,
and he said it was a terrible thing, and Iwould have to
answer to the Almighty, have to purge my soul by telling the
officers what I’d told him, and would I?” Receiving an
affirmative nod, the prisoner’s spiritual adviser stepped into
an adjacent room, which was crowded with expectant
policemen, and elatedly issued an invitation: “Come on in.
The boy’s ready to make a statement.”
The Andrews case became the basis for a legal and
medical crusade. Prior to the trial, at which Andrews
pleaded innocent by reason of insanity, the psychiatric staff
of the Menninger Clinic conducted an exhaustive
examination of the accused; this produced a diagnosis of
“schizophrenia, simple type.” By “simple,” the
diagnosticians meant that Andrews suffered no delusions,
no false perceptions, no hallucinations, but the primary
illness of separation of thinking from feeling. He understood
the nature of his acts, and that they were prohibited, and
that he was subject to punishment. “But,” to quote Dr.
Joseph Satten, one of the examiners, “Lowell Lee Andrews
felt no emotions whatsoever. He considered himself the
only important, only significant person in the world. And in
his own seclusive world it seemed to him just as right to kill
his mother as to kill an animal or a fly.”
In the opinion of Dr. Satten and his colleagues, Andrews’
crime amounted to such an undebatable example of
diminished responsibility that the case offered an ideal
chance to challenge the M’Naghten Rule in Kansas courts.
The M’Naghten Rule, as has been previously stated,
recognizes no form of insanity provided the defendant has
the capacity to discriminate between right and wrong—
legally, not morally. Much to the distress of psychiatrists and
liberal jurists, the Rule prevails in the courts of the British
Commonwealth and, in the United States, in the courts of all
but half a dozen or so of the states and the District of
Columbia, which abide by the more lenient, though to some
minds impractical, Durham Rule, which is simply that an
accused is not criminally responsible if his unlawful act is
the product of mental disease or mental defect.
In short, what Andrews’ defenders, a team composed of
Menninger Clinic psychiatrists and two first-class attorneys,
hoped to achieve was a victory of legal-landmark stature.
The great essential was to persuade the court to substitute
the Durham Rule for the M’Naghten Rule. If that happened,
then Andrews, because of the abundant evidence
concerning his schizophrenic condition, would certainly be
sentenced not to the gallows, or even to prison, but to
confinement in the State Hospital for the Criminally Insane.
However, the defense reckoned without the defendant’s
religious counselor, the tireless Reverend Mr. Dameron,
who appeared at the trial as the chief witness for the
prosecution, and who, in the overwrought, rococo style of a
tent-show revivalist, told the court he had often warned his
former Sunday School pupil of God’s impending wrath: “I
says, there isn’t anything in this world that is worth more
than your soul, and you have acknowledged to me a
number of times in our conversations that your faith is
weak, that you have no faith in God. You know that all sin is
against God and God is your final judge, and you have got
to answer to Him. That is what Isaid to make him feel the
terribleness of the thing he’d done, and that he had to
answer to the Almighty for this crime.”
Apparently the Reverend Dameron was determined young
Andrews should answer not only to the Almighty, but also to
more temporal powers, for it was his testimony, added to
the defendant’s confession, that settled matters. The
presiding judge upheld the M’Naghten Rule, and the jury
gave the state the death penalty it demanded.
Friday, May 13, the first date set for the execution of Smith
and Hickock, passed harmlessly, the Kansas Supreme
Court having granted them a stay pending the outcome of
appeals for a new trial filed by their lawyers. At that time the
Andrews verdict was under review by the same court.
Perry’s cell adjoined Dick’s; though invisible to each other,
they could easily converse, yet Perry seldom spoke to Dick,
and it wasn’t because of any declared animosity between
them (after the exchange of a few tepid reproaches, their
relationship had turned into one of mutual toleration: the
acceptance of uncongenial but helpless Siamese twins); it
was because Perry, cautious as always, secretive,
suspicious, disliked having the guards and other inmates
overhear his “private business”—especially Andrews, or
Andy, as he was called on the Row. Andrews’ educated
accent and the formal quality of his college-trained
intelligence were anathema to Perry, who though he had
not gone beyond third grade, imagined himself more
learned than most of his acquaintances, and enjoyed
correcting them, especially their grammar and
pronunciation. But here suddenly was someone—“just a
kid!”—constantly correcting him. Was it any wonder he
never opened his mouth? Better to keep your mouth shut
than to risk one of the college kid’s snotty lines, like: “Don’t
say disinterested. When what you mean is uninterested.”
Andrews meant well, he was without malice, but Perry could
have boiled him in oil—yet he never admitted it, never let
anyone there guess why, after one of these humiliating
incidents, he sat and sulked and ignored the meals that
were delivered to him three times a day. At the beginning of
June he stopped eating altogether—he told Dick, “You can
wait around for the rope. But not me”—and from that
moment he refused to touch food or water, or say one word
to anybody.
The fast lasted five days before the warden took it
seriously. On the sixth day he ordered Smith transferred to
the prison hospital, but the move did not lessen Perry’s
resolve; when attempts were made to force-feed him he
fought back, tossed his head and clenched his jaws until
they were rigid as horseshoes. Eventually, he had to be
pinioned and fed intravenously or through a tube inserted in
a nostril. Even so, over the next nine weeks his weight fell
from 168 to 115 pounds, and the warden was warned that
forced-feeding alone could not keep the patient alive
indefinitely.
Dick, though impressed by Perry’s will power, would not
concede that his purpose was suicide; even when Perry
was reported to be in a coma, he told Andrews, with whom
he had become friendly, that his former confederate was
faking. “He just wants them to think he’s crazy.”
Andrews, a compulsive eater (he had filled a scrapbook
with illustrated edibles, everything from strawberry
shortcake to roasted pig), said, “Maybe he is crazy.
Starving himself like that.”
“He just wants to get out of here. Play-acting. So they’ll say
he’s crazy and put him in the crazy house.”
Dick afterward grew fond of quoting Andrews’ reply, for it
seemed to him a fine specimen of the boy’s “funny
thinking,” his “off on a cloud” complacency. “Well,” Andrews
allegedly said, “it sure strikes me a hard way to do it.
Starving yourself. Because sooner or later we’ll all get out
of here. Either walk out—or be carried out in a coffin.
Myself, Idon’t care whether Iwalk or get carried. It’s all the
same in the end.”
Dick said, “The trouble with you, Andy, you’ve got no
respect for human life. Including your own.”
Andrews agreed. “And,” he said, “I’ll tell you something
else. If ever Ido get out of here alive, Imean over the walls
and clear out—well, maybe nobody will know where Andy
went, but they’ll sure hell know where Andy’s been.”
All summer Perry undulated between half-awake stupors
and sickly, sweat-drenched sleep. Voices roared through
his head; one voice persistently asked him, “Where is
Jesus? Where?” And once he woke up shouting, “The bird
is Jesus! The bird is Jesus!” His favorite old theatrical
fantasy, the one in which he thought of himself as “Perry
O’Parsons, The One-Man Symphony,” returned in the guise
of a recurrent dream. The dream’s geographical center
was a Las Vegas night-club where, wearing a white top hat
and a white tuxedo, he strutted about a spotlighted stage
playing in turn a harmonica, a guitar, a banjo, drums, sang
“You Are My Sunshine,” and tap-danced up a short flight of
gold-painted prop steps; at the top, standing on a platform,
he took a bow. There was no applause, none, and yet
thousands of patrons packed the vast and gaudy room—a
strange audience, mostly men and mostly Negroes. Staring
at them, the perspiring entertainer at last understood their
silence, for suddenly he knew that these were phantoms,
the ghosts of the legally annihilated, the hanged, the
gassed, the electrocuted—and in the same instant he
realized that he was there to join them, that the gold-painted
steps had led to a scaffold, that the platform on which he
stood was opening beneath him. His top hat tumbled;
urinating, defecating, Perry O’Parsons entered eternity.
One afternoon he escaped from a dream and wakened to
find the warden standing beside his bed. The warden said,
“Sounds like you were having a little nightmare?” But Perry
wouldn’t answer him, and the warden, who on several
occasions had visited the hospital and tried to persuade
the prisoner to cease his fast, said, “Ihave something here.
From your father. Ithought you might want to see it.” Perry,
his eyes glitteringly immense in a face now almost
phosphorescently pale, studied the ceiling; and presently,
after placing a picture postcard on the patient’s bedside
table, the rebuffed visitor departed.
That night Perry looked at the card. It was addressed to the
warden, and postmarked Blue Lake, California; the
message, written in a familiar stubby script, said: “Dear Sir,
Iunderstand you have my boy Perry back in custody. Write
me please what did he do wrong and if Icome there could I
see him. Alls well with me and trust the same with you. Tex
J. Smith.” Perry destroyed the card, but his mind preserved
it, for the few crude words had resurrected him emotionally,
revived love and hate, and reminded him that he was still
what he had tried not to be—alive. “And Ijust decided,” he
later informed a friend, “that Iought to stay that way.
Anybody wanted my life wasn’t going to get any more help
from me. They’d have to fight for it.”
The next morning he asked for a glass of milk, the first
sustenance he had volunteered to accept in fourteen
weeks. Gradually, on a diet of eggnogs and orange juice,
he regained weight; by October the prison physician, Dr.
Robert Moore, considered him strong enough to be
returned to the Row. When he arrived there, Dick laughed
and said, “Welcome home, honey.”
Two years passed.
The departures of Wilson and Spencer left Smith and
Hickock and Andrews alone with the Row’s burning lights
and veiled windows. The privileges granted ordinary
prisoners were denied them; no radios or card games, not
even an exercise period—indeed, they were never allowed
out of their cells, except each Saturday when they were
taken to a shower room, then given a once-weekly change
of clothing; the only other occasions for momentary release
were the far-between visits of lawyers or relatives. Mrs.
Hickock came once a month; her husband had died, she
had lost the farm, and, as she told Dick, lived now with one
relative, now another.
It seemed to Perry as though he existed “deep
underwater”—perhaps because the Row usually was as
gray and quiet as ocean depths, soundless except for
snores, coughs, the whisper of slippered feet, the feathery
racket of the pigeons nesting in the prison walls. But not
always. “Sometimes,” Dick wrote in a letter to his mother,
“you can’t hear yourself think. They throw men in the cells
downstairs, what they call the hole, and plenty of them are
fighting mad and crazy to boot. Curse and scream the
whole time. It’s intolerable, so everybody starts yelling shut
up. Iwish you’d send me earplugs. Only they wouldn’t allow
me to have them. No rest for the wicked, Iguess.”
The little building had been standing for more than a
century, and seasonal changes provoked different
symptoms of its antiquity: winter cold saturated the stone-
and-iron fixtures, and in summer, when temperatures often
hurtled over the hundred mark, the old cells were
malodorous cauldrons. “So hot my skin stings,” Dick wrote
in a letter dated July 5, 1961. “Itry not to move much. Ijust
sit on the floor. My bed’s too sweaty to lie down, and the
smell makes me sick because of only the one bath a week
and always wearing the same clothes. No ventilation
whatever and the light bulbs make everything hotter. Bugs
keep bumping on the walls.”
Unlike conventional prisoners, the condemned are not
subjected to a work routine; they can do with their time what
they like—sleep all day, as Perry frequently did (“Ipretend
I’m a tiny little baby that can’t keep its eyes open”); or, as
was Andrews’ habit, read all night. Andrews averaged
fifteen to twenty books a week; his taste encompassed
both trash and belles-lettres, and he liked poetry, Robert
Frost’s particularly, but he also admired Whitman, Emily
Dickinson, and the comic poems of Ogden Nash. Though
the quenchless quality of his literary thirst had soon
depleted the shelves of the prison library, the prison
chaplain and others sympathetic to Andrews kept him
supplied with parcels from the Kansas City public library.
Dick was rather a bookworm, too; but his interest was
restricted to two themes—sex, as represented in the novels
of Harold Robbins and Irving Wallace (Perry, after being
lent one of these by Dick, returned it with an indignant note:
“Degenerate filth for filthy degenerate minds!”), and law
literature. He consumed hours each day leafing through law
books, compiling research that he hoped would help
reverse his conviction. Also, in pursuit of the same cause
he fired off a cannonade of letters to such organizations as
the American Civil Liberties Union and the Kansas State
Bar Association—letters attacking his trial as a “travesty of
due process,” and urging the recipients to aid him in his
quest for a new trial. Perry was persuaded to draft similar
pleas, but when Dick suggested that Andy follow their
example by writing protests in his own behalf, Andrews
replied, “I’ll worry about my neck and you worry about
yours.” (Actually, Dick’s neck was not the part of his
anatomy that most immediately troubled him. “My hair is
coming out by the handfuls,” he confided in yet another
letter to his mother. “I’m frantic. Nobody in our family was
baldheaded as Ican recall, and it makes me frantic the
idea of being an ugly old baldhead.”)
The Row’s two night guards, arriving at work on an autumn
evening in 1961, had a piece of news. “Well,” one of them
announced, “seems like you boys can expect company.”
The import of the remark was clear to his audience: it
meant that two young soldiers, who had been standing trial
for the murder of a Kansas railroad worker, had received
the ultimate sentence. “Yessir,” the guard said, confirming
this, “they got the death penalty.” Dick said, “Sure. It’s very
popular in Kansas. Juries hand it out like they were giving
candy to kids.”
One of the soldiers, George Ronald York, was eighteen; his
companion, James Douglas Latham, was a year older.
They were both exceptionally personable, which perhaps
explains why hordes of teen-aged girls had attended their
trial. Though convicted of a single slaying, the pair had
claimed seven victims in the course of a cross-country
murder spree.
Ronnie York, blond and blue-eyed, had been born and
raised in Florida, where his father was a well-known, well-
paid deep-sea diver. The Yorks had a pleasantly
comfortable home life, and Ronnie, overloved and
overpraised by his parents and a worshipful younger sister,
was the adored center of it. Latham’s background was at
the opposite extreme, being every bit as bleak as Perry
Smith’s. Born in Texas, he was the youngest child of fertile,
moneyless, embattled parents who, when finally they
separated, left their progeny to fend for themselves, to
scatter hither and thither, loose and unwanted as bundles of
Panhandle tumbleweed. At seventeen, in need of a refuge,
Latham enlisted in the Army; two years later, found guilty of
an AWOL offense, he was imprisoned in the stockade at
Fort Hood, Texas. It was there that he met Ronnie York,
who was also under sentence for having gone AWOL.
Though they were very unlike—even physically, York being
tall and phlegmatic, whereas the Texan was a short young
man with foxy brown eyes animating a compact, cute little
face—they found they shared at least one firm opinion: the
world was hateful, and everybody in it would be better off
dead. “It’s a rotten world,” Latham said. “There’s no answer
to it but meanness. That’s all anybody understands—
meanness. Burn down the man’s barn—he’ll understand
that. Poison his dog. Kill him.” Ronnie said Latham was
“one hundred percent correct,” adding, “Anyway, anybody
you kill, you’re doing them a favor.”
The first person they chose to so favor were two Georgia
women, respectable housewives who had the misfortune to
encounter York and Latham not long after the murderous
pair escaped from the Fort Hood stockade, stole a pickup
truck, and drove to Jacksonville, Florida, York’s home town.
The scene of the encounter was an Esso station on the
dark outskirts of Jacksonville; the date was the night of May
29, 1961. Originally, the absconding soldiers had traveled
to the Florida city with the intention of visiting York’s family;
once there, however, York decided it might be unwise to
contact his parents; his father sometimes had quite a
temper. He and Latham talked it over, and New Orleans
was their new destination when they stopped at the Esso
station to buy gas. Alongside them another car was
imbibing fuel; it contained the two matronly victims-to-be,
who, after a day of shopping and pleasure in Jacksonville,
were returning to their homes in a small town near the
Florida-Georgia border. Alas, they had lost their way. York,
from whom they asked directions, was most obliging: “You
just follow us. We’ll put you on the right road.” But the road
to which he led them was very wrong indeed: a narrow
side-turning that petered off into swamp. Nevertheless, the
ladies followed along faithfully until the lead vehicle halted,
and they saw, in the shine of their headlights, the helpful
young men approaching them on foot, and saw, but too
late, that each was armed with a black bullwhip. The whips
were the property of the stolen truck’s rightful custodian, a
cattleman; it had been Latham’s notion to use them as
garrotes—which, after robbing the women, is what they did.
In New Orleans the boys bought a pistol and carved two
notches in the handle.
During the next ten days notches were added in Tullahoma,
Tennessee, where they acquired a snappy red Dodge
convertible by shooting the owner, a traveling salesman;
and in an Illinois suburb of St. Louis, where two more men
were slain. The Kansas victim, who followed the preceding
five, was a grandfather; his name was Otto Ziegler, he was
sixty-two, a robust, friendly fellow, the sort not likely to pass
distressed motorists without offering assistance. While
spinning along a Kansas highway one fine June morning,
Mr. Ziegler spied a red convertible parked by the roadside,
its hood up, and a couple of nice-looking youngsters
fiddling with the motor. How was the good-hearted Mr.
Ziegler to know that nothing ailed the machine—that this
was a ruse devised to rob and kill would-be Samaritans?
His last words were, “Anything Ican do?” York, at a
distance of twenty feet, sent a bullet crashing through the
old man’s skull, then turned to Latham and said, “Pretty
good shootin’, huh?”
Their final victim was the most pathetic. It was a girl, only
eighteen; she was employed as a maid in a Colorado
motel where the rampaging pair spent a night, during which
she let them make love to her. Then they told her they were
on their way to California, and invited her to come along.
“Come on,” Latham urged her, “maybe we’ll all end up
movie stars.” The girl and her hastily packed cardboard
suitcase ended up as blood-soaked wreckage at the
bottom of a ravine near Craig, Colorado; but not many
hours after she had been shot and thrown there, her
assassins were in fact performing before motion-picture
cameras.
Descriptions of the red car’s occupants, provided by
witnesses who had noticed them loitering in the area where
Otto Ziegler’s body was discovered, had been circulated
through the Midwest and Western states. Roadblocks were
erected, and helicopters patrolled the highways; it was a
roadblock in Utah that caught York and Latham. Later, at
Police Headquarters in Salt Lake City, a local television
company was allowed to film an interview with them. The
result, if viewed without sound, would seem to concern two
cheerful, milkfed athletes discussing hockey or baseball—
anything but murder and the roles, boastfully confessed,
they had played in the deaths of seven people. “Why,” the
interviewer asks, “why did you do it?” And York, with a self-
congratulatory grin, answers, “We hate the world.”
All five of the states that vied for the right to prosecute York
and Latham endorse judicial homicide: Florida
(electrocution), Tennessee (electrocution), Illinois
(electrocution), Kansas (hanging), and Colorado (lethal
gas). But because it had the firmest evidence, Kansas was
victorious.
The men on the Row first met their new companions
November 2, 1961. A guard, escorting the arrivals to their
cells, introduced them: “Mr. York, Mr. Latham, I’d like you to
know Mr. Smith here. And Mr. Hickock. And Mr. Lowell Lee
Andrews— ‘the nicest boy in Wolcott!’ ”
When the parade had passed, Hickock heard Andrews
chuckling, and said, “What’s so funny about that
sonofabitch?”
“Nothing,” Andrews said. “But Iwas thinking: when you
count my three and your four and their seven, that makes
fourteen of them and five of us. Now five into fourteen
averages out—”
“Four into fourteen,” Hickock curtly corrected him. “There
are four killers up here and one railroaded man. I’m no
goddam killer. Inever touched a hair on a human head.”
Hickock continued writing letters protesting his conviction,
and one of these at last bore fruit. The recipient, Everett
Steerman, Chairman of the Legal Aid Committee of the
Kansas State Bar Association, was disturbed by the
allegations of the sender, who insisted that he and his co-
defendant had not had a fair trial. According to Hickock, the
“hostile atmosphere” in Garden City had made it
impossible to empanel an unbiased jury, and therefore a
change of venue should have been granted. As for the
jurors that were chosen, at least two had clearly indicated a
presumption of guilt during the voir dire examination
(“When asked to state his opinion of capital punishment,
one man said that ordinarily he was against it, but in this
case no”); unfortunately, the voir dire had not been
recorded because Kansas law does not require it unless a
specific demand is made. Many of the jurors, moreover,
were “well acquainted with the deceased. So was the
judge. Judge Tate was an intimate friend of Mr. Clutter.”
But the bulkiest of Hickock’s mudpies was aimed at the two
defense attorneys, Arthur Fleming and Harrison Smith,
whose “incompetence and inadequacy” were the chief
cause of the correspondent’s present predicament, for no
real defense had been prepared or offered by them, and
this lack of effort, it was implied, had been deliberate—an
act of collusion between the defense and the prosecution.
These were grave assertions, reflecting upon the integrity
of two respected lawyers and a distinguished district judge,
but if even partially true, then the constitutional rights of the
defendants had been abused. Prompted by Mr. Steerman,
the Bar Association undertook a course of action without
precedent in Kansas legal history: it appointed a young
Wichita attorney, Russell Shultz, to investigate the charges
and, should evidence warrant it, challenge the validity of the
conviction by bringing habeas corpus proceedings in the
Kansas Supreme Court, which had recently upheld the
verdict.
It would appear that Shultz’s investigation was rather one-
sided, since it consisted of little more than an interview with
Smith and Hickock, from which the lawyer emerged with
crusading phrases for the press: “The question is this—do
poor, plainly guilty defendants have a right to a complete
defense? Ido not believe that the State of Kansas would be
either greatly or for long harmed by the death of these
appellants. But Ido not believe it could ever recover from
the death of due process.”
Shultz filed his habeas corpus petition, and the Kansas
Supreme Court commissioned one of its own retired
justices, the Honorable Walter G. Thiele, to conduct a full-
scale hearing. And so it came to pass that almost two
years after the trial, the whole cast reassembled in the
courtroom at Garden City. The only important participants
absent were the original defendants; in their stead, as it
were, stood Judge Tate, old Mr. Fleming, and Harrison
Smith, whose careers were imperiled—not because of the
appellant’s allegations per se, but because of the apparent
credit the Bar Association bestowed upon them.
The hearing, which at one point was transferred to Lansing,
where Judge Thiele heard Smith and Hickock testify, took
six days to complete; ultimately, every point was covered.
Eight jurors swore they had never known any member of the
slain family; four admitted some slight acquaintance with
Mr. Clutter, but each, including N. L. Dunnan, the airport
operator who had made the controversial reply during the
voir dire, testified that he had entered the jurybox with an
unprejudiced mind. Shultz challenged Dunnan: “Do you feel,
sir, that you would have been willing to go to trial with a juror
whose state of mind was the same as yours?” Dunnan said
yes, he would; and Shultz then said, “Do you recall being
asked whether or not you were averse to capital
punishment?” Nodding, the witness answered, “Itold them
under normal conditions Iwould probably be averse to it.
But with the magnitude of this crime Icould probably vote in
favor.”
Tangling with Tate was more difficult: Shultz soon realized
he had a tiger by the tail. Responding to questions relevant
to his supposed intimacy with Mr. Clutter, the judge said,
“He [Clutter] was once a litigant in this court, a case over
which Ipresided, a damage action involving an airplane
falling on his property; he was suing for damages to—I
believe some fruit trees. Other than that, Ihad no occasion
to associate with him. None whatever. Isaw him perhaps
once or twice in the course of a year . . .” Shultz,
floundering, switched the subject. “Do you know,” he asked,
“what the attitude of the people was in this community after
the apprehension of these two men?” “Ibelieve Ido,” the
judge told him with scathing confidence. “It is my opinion
that the attitude toward them was that of anyone else
charged with a criminal offense—that they should be tried
as the law provides; that if they were guilty they should be
convicted; that they should be given the same fair treatment
as any other person. There was no prejudice against them
because they were accused of crime.” “You mean,” Shultz
slyly said, “you saw no reason for the court on its own
motion to grant a change of venue?” Tate’s lips curved
downward, his eyes blazed. “Mr. Shultz,” he said, as though
the name was a prolonged hiss, “the court cannot on its
own grant a change of venue. That would be contrary to
Kansas law. Icouldn’t grant a change unless it was properly
requested.”
But why had such a request not been made by the
defendants’ attorneys? Shultz now pursued this question
with the attorneys themselves, for to discredit them and
prove that they had not supplied their clients with the
minimum protection was, from the Wichita lawyer’s
viewpoint, the hearing’s principal objective. Fleming and
Smith withstood the onslaught in good style, particularly
Fleming, who, wearing a bold red tie and an abiding smile,
endured Shultz with gentlemanly resignation. Explaining
why he had not applied for a change of venue, he said, “I
felt that since the Reverend Cowan, the minister of the
Methodist church, and a man of substance here, a man of
high standing, as well as many other ministers here, had
expressed themselves against capital punishment, that at
least the leaven had been cast in the area, and there were
likely more people here inclined to be lenient in the matter
of the penalty than perhaps in other parts of the state. Then I
believe it was a brother of Mrs. Clutter’s who made a
statement that appeared in the press indicating he did not
feel the defendants should be put to death.”
Shultz had a score of charges, but underlying them all was
the implication that because of community pressure,
Fleming and Smith had deliberately neglected their duties.
Both men, Shultz maintained, had betrayed their clients by
not consulting with them sufficiently (Mr. Fleming replied, “I
worked on the case to the very best of my ability, giving it
more time than Ido most cases”); by waiving a preliminary
hearing (Smith answered, “But sir, neither Mr. Fleming nor I
had been appointed counsel at the time of the waiver”); by
making remarks to newsmen damaging to the defendants
(Shultz to Smith: “Are you aware that a reporter, Ron Kull of
the Topeka Daily Capital, quoted you, on the second day
of the trial, as saying there was no doubt of Mr. Hickock’s
guilt, but that you were concerned only with obtaining life
imprisonment rather than the death penalty?” Smith to
Shultz: “No, sir. If Iwas quoted as saying that it was
incorrect”); and by failing to prepare a proper defense.
This last proposition was the one Shultz pedaled hardest; it
is relevant, therefore, to reproduce an opinion of it written
by three Federal judges as the result of a subsequent
appeal to the United States Court of Appeals, Tenth Circuit:
“We think, however, that those viewing the situation in
retrospect have lost sight of the problems which confronted
Attorneys Smith and Fleming when they undertook the
defense of these petitioners. When they accepted the
appointments each petitioner had made a full confession,
and they did not then contend, nor did they seriously
contend at any time in the state courts, that these
confessions were not voluntary. A radio taken from the
Clutter home and sold by the petitioners in Mexico City had
been recovered, and the attorneys knew of other evidence
of their guilt then in the possession of the prosecution.
When called upon to plead to the charges against them
they stood mute, and it was necessary for the court to enter
a plea of not guilty for them. There was no substantial
evidence then, and none has been produced since the trial,
to substantiate a defense of insanity. The attempt to
establish insanity as a defense because of serious injuries
in accidents years before, and headaches and occasional
fainting spells of Hickock, was like grasping at the
proverbial straw. The attorneys were faced with a situation
where outrageous crimes committed on innocent persons
had been admitted. Under these circumstances, they would
have been justified in advising that petitioners enter pleas
of guilty and throw themselves on the mercy of the court.
Their only hope was through some turn of fate the lives of
these misguided individuals might be spared.”
In the report he submitted to the Kansas Supreme Court,
Judge Thiele found that the petitioners had received a
constitutionally fair trial; the court thereupon denied the writ
to abolish the verdict, and set a new date of execution—
October 25, 1962. As it happened, Lowell Lee Andrews,
whose case had twice traveled all the way to the United
States Supreme Court, was scheduled to hang one month
later.
The Clutter slayers, granted a reprieve by a Federal judge,
evaded their date. Andrews kept his.
In the disposition of capital cases in the United States, the
median elapsed time between sentence and execution is
approximately seventeen months. Recently, in Texas, an
armed robber was electrocuted one month after his
conviction; but in Louisiana, at the present writing, two
rapists have been waiting for a record twelve years. The
variance depends a little on luck and a great deal on the
extent of litigation. The majority of the lawyers handling
these cases are court-appointed and work without
recompense; but more often than not the courts, in order to
avoid future appeals based on complaints of inadequate
representation, appoint men of first quality who defend with
commendable vigor. However, even an attorney of
moderate talent can postpone doomsday year after year,
for the system of appeals that pervades American
jurisprudence amounts to a legalistic wheel of fortune, a
game of chance, somewhat fixed in the favor of the
criminal, that the participants play interminably, first in the
state courts, then through the Federal courts until the
ultimate tribunal is reached—the United States Supreme
Court. But even defeat there does not signify if petitioner’s
counsel can discover or invent new grounds for appeal;
usually they can, and so once more the wheel turns, and
turns until, perhaps some years later, the prisoner arrives
back at the nation’s highest court, probably only to begin
again the slow cruel contest. But at intervals the wheel does
pause to declare a winner—or, though with increasing
rarity, a loser: Andrews’ lawyers fought to the final moment,
but their client went to the gallows on Friday, November 30,
1962.
“That was a cold night,” Hickock said, talking to a journalist
with whom he corresponded and who was periodically
allowed to visit him. “Cold and wet. It had been raining like
a bastard, and the baseball field was mud up to your
cojones. So when they took Andy out to the warehouse,
they had to walk him along the path. We were all at our
windows watching—Perry and me, Ronnie York, Jimmy
Latham. It was just after midnight, and the warehouse was
lit up like a Halloween pumpkin. The doors wide open. We
could see the witnesses, a lot of guards, the doctor and the
warden—every damn thing but the gallows. It was off at an
angle, but we could see its shadow. A shadow on the wall
like the shadow of a boxing ring.
“The chaplain and four guards had charge of Andy, and
when they got to the door they stopped a second. Andy was
looking at the gallows—you could sense he was. His arms
were tied in front of him. All of a sudden the chaplain
reached out and took off Andy’s glasses. Which was kind
of pitiful, Andy without his glasses. They led him on inside,
and Iwondered he could see to climb the steps. It was real
quiet, just nothing but this dog barking way off. Some town
dog. Then we heard it, the sound, and Jimmy Latham said,
“What was that?”; and Itold him what it was—the trap door.
“Then it was real quiet again. Except that dog. Old Andy, he
danced a long time. They must have had a real mess to
clean up. Every few minutes the doctor came to the door
and stepped outside, and stood there with this stethoscope
in his hand. Iwouldn’t say he was enjoying his work—kept
gasping, like he was gasping for breath, and he was crying,
too. Jimmy said, ‘Get a load of that nance.’ Iguess the
reason he stepped outside was so the others wouldn’t see
he was crying. Then he’d go back and listen to hear if
Andy’s heart had stopped. Seemed like it never would. The
fact is, his heart kept beating for nineteen minutes.
“Andy was a funny kid,” Hickock said, smiling lopsidedly as
he propped a cigarette between his lips. “It was like Itold
him: he had no respect for human life, not even his own.
Right before they hanged him, he sat down and ate two
fried chickens. And that last afternoon he was smoking
cigars and drinking Coke and writing poetry. When they
came to get him, and we said our goodbye, Isaid, ‘I’ll be
seeing you soon, Andy. ’Cause I’m sure we’re going to the
same place. So scout around and see if you can’t find a
cool shady spot for us Down There.’ He laughed, and said
he didn’t believe in heaven or hell, just dust unto dust. And
he said an aunt and uncle had been to see him, and told
him they had a coffin waiting to carry him to some little
cemetery in north Missouri. The same place where the
three he disposed of were buried. They planned to put
Andy right alongside them. He said when they told him that
he could hardly keep a straight face. Isaid, ‘Well, you’re
lucky to have a grave. Most likely they’ll give Perry and me
to the vivisectionist.’ We joked on like that till it was time to
go, and just as he was going he handed me a piece of
paper with a poem on it. Idon’t know if he wrote it. Or
copied it out of a book. My impression was he wrote it. If
you’re interested, I’ll send it to you.”
He later did so, and Andrews’ farewell message turned out
to be the ninth stanza of Gray’s “Elegy Written in a Country
Churchyard”:
The boasts of heraldry, the pomp of pow’r,
And all that beauty, all that wealth e’er gave,
Await alike the inevitable hour:
The paths of glory lead but to the grave.
“Ireally liked Andy. He was a nut—not a real nut, like they
kept hollering; but, you know, just goofy. He was always
talking about breaking out of here and making his living as
a hired gun. He liked to imagine himself roaming around
Chicago or Los Angeles with a machine gun inside a violin
case. Cooling guys. Said he’d charge a thousand bucks
per stiff.”
Hickock laughed, presumably at the absurdity of his friend’s
ambitions, sighed, and shook his head. “But for someone
his age he was the smartest person Iever come across. A
human library. When that boy read a book it stayed read.
Course he didn’t know a dumb-darn thing about life. Me,
I’m an ignoramus except when it comes to what Iknow
about life. I’ve walked along a lot of mean streets. I’ve seen
a white man flogged. I’ve watched babies born. I’ve seen a
girl, and her no more than fourteen, take on three guys at
the same time and give them all their money’s worth. Fell
off a ship once five miles out to sea. Swam five miles with
my life passing before me with every stroke. Once Ishook
hands with President Truman in the lobby of the Hotel
Muehlebach. Harry S Truman. When Iwas working for the
hospital, driving an ambulance, Isaw every side of life there
is—things that would make a dog vomit. But Andy. He
didn’t know one dumb-damn-darn thing except what he’d
read in books.
“He was innocent as a little child, some kid with a box of
Cracker Jack. He’d never once been with a woman. Man or
mule. He said so himself. Maybe that’s what Iliked about
him most. How he wouldn’t prevaricate. The rest of us on
the Row, we’re all a bunch of bull-artists. I’m one of the
worst. Shoot, you’ve got to talk about something. Brag.
Otherwise you’re nobody, nothing, a potato vegetating in
your seven-by-ten limbo. But Andy never would partake. He
said what’s the use telling a lot of stuff that never happened.
“Old Perry, though, he wasn’t sorry to see the last of Andy.
Andy was the one thing in the world Perry wants to be—
educated. And Perry couldn’t forgive him for it. You know
how Perry’s always using hundred-dollar words he doesn’t
half know the meaning of? Sounds like one of them college
niggers? Boy, it burned his bottom to have Andy catch up
on him and haul him to the curb. Course Andy was just
trying to give him what he wanted—an education. The truth
is, can’t anybody get along with Perry. He hasn’t got a
single friend on the premises. Imean, just who the hell does
he think he is? Sneering at everybody. Calling people
perverts and degenerates. Going on about what low I.Q.’s
they have. It’s too bad we can’t all be such sensitive souls
like little Perry. Saints. Boy, but Iknow some hardrocks
who’d gladly go to The Corner if they could get him alone in
the shower room for just one hot minute. The way he high-
hats York and Latham! Ronnie says he sure wishes he
knew where he could lay hold of a bullwhip. Says he’d like
to squeeze Perry a little. Idon’t blame him. After all, we’re
all in the same fix, and they’re pretty good boys.”
Hickock chuckled ruefully, shrugged, and said, “You know
what Imean. Good—considering. Ronnie York’s mother
has been here to visit him several times. One day, out in the
waiting room, she met my mother, and now they’ve come to
be each other’s number-one buddy. Mrs. York wants my
mother to come visit her home in Florida, maybe even live
there. Jesus, Iwish she would. Then she wouldn’t have to
go through this ordeal. Once a month riding the bus here to
see me. Smiling, trying to find something to say, make me
feel good. The poor lady. Idon’t know how she stands it. I
wonder she isn’t crazy.”
Hickock’s uneven eyes turned toward a window in the
visiting room; his face, puffy, pallid as a funeral lily,
gleamed in the weak winter sunshine filtering through the
bar-shrouded glass.
“The poor lady. She wrote the warden, and asked him if she
could speak to Perry the next time she came here. She
wanted to hear from Perry himself how he killed those
people, how Inever fired shot one. All Ican hope is that
some day we’ll get a new trial, and Perry will testify and tell
the truth. Only Idoubt it. He’s plain determined that if he
goes Igo. Back to back. It’s not right. Many a man has
killed and never seen the inside of a death cell. And Inever
killed anybody. If you’ve got fifty thousand dollars to spend,
you could bump off half of Kansas City and just laugh ha
ha.” A sudden grin obliterated his woeful indignation. “Uh-
oh. There Igo again. Old crybaby. You’d think I’d learn. But
honest to God, I’ve done my damnedest to get along with
Perry. Only he’s so critical. Two-faced. So jealous of every
little thing. Every letter Iget, every visit. Nobody ever comes
to see him except you,” he said, nodding at the journalist,
who was as equally well acquainted with Smith as he was
with Hickock. “Or his lawyer. Remember when he was in
the hospital? With that phony starvation routine? And his
dad sent the postcard? Well, the warden wrote Perry’s dad
and said he was welcome to come here any time. But he
never has showed up. Idon’t know. Sometimes you got to
feel sorry for Perry. He must be one of the most alone
people there ever was. But. Aw, the hell with him. It’s mostly
every bit his own fault.”
Hickock slipped another cigarette away from a package of
Pall Malls, wrinkled his nose, and said, “I’ve tried to quit
smoking. Then Ifigure what difference does it make under
the circumstances. With a little luck, maybe I’ll get cancer
and beat the state at its own game. For a while there Iwas
smoking cigars. Andy’s. The morning after they hanged
him, Iwoke up and called to him, ‘Andy?’—the way Iusually
did. Then Iremembered he was on his way to Missouri.
With the aunt and uncle. Ilooked out in the corridor. His cell
had been cleaned out, and all his junk was piled there. The
mattress off his bunk, his slippers, and the scrapbook with
all the food pictures—he called it his icebox. And this box of
‘Macbeth’ cigars. Itold the guard Andy wanted me to have
them, left them to me in his will. Actually, Inever smoked
them all. Maybe it was the idea of Andy, but somehow they
gave me indigestion.
“Well, what’s there to say about capital punishment? I’m not
against it. Revenge is all it is, but what’s wrong with
revenge? It’s very important. If Iwas kin to the Clutters, or
any of the parties York and Latham dispensed with, I
couldn’t rest in peace till the ones responsible had taken
that ride on the Big Swing. These people that write letters
to the newspapers. There were two in a Topeka paper the
other day—one from a minister. Saying, in effect, what is all
this legal farce, why haven’t those sonsabitches Smith and
Hickock got it in the neck, how come those murdering
sonsabitches are still eating up the taxpayers’ money?
Well, Ican see their side. They’re mad ’cause they’re not
getting what they want—revenge. And they’re not going to
get it if Ican help it. Ibelieve in hanging. Just so long as I’m
not the one being hanged.”
But then he was.
Another three years passed, and during those years two
exceptionally skillful Kansas City lawyers, Joseph P.
Jenkins and Robert Bingham, replaced Shultz, the latter
having resigned from the case. Appointed by a Federal
judge, and working without compensation (but motivated by
a hard-held opinion that the defendants had been the
victims of a “nightmarishly unfair trial”), Jenkins and
Bingham filed numerous appeals within the framework of
the Federal court system, thereby avoiding three execution
dates: October 25, 1962, August 8, 1963, and February 18,
1965. The attorneys contended that their clients had been
unjustly convicted because legal counsel had not been
appointed them until after they had confessed and had
waived preliminary hearings; and because they were not
competently represented at their trial, were convicted with
the help of evidence seized without a search warrant (the
shotgun and knife taken from the Hickock home), were not
granted a change of venue even though the environs of the
trial had been “saturated” with publicity prejudicial to the
accused.
With these arguments, Jenkins and Bingham succeeded in
carrying the case three times to the United States Supreme
Court—the Big Boy, as many litigating prisoners refer to it
—but on each occasion the Court, which never comments
on its decisions in such instances, denied the appeals by
refusing to grant the writs of certiorari that would have
entitled the appellants to a full hearing before the Court. In
March, 1965, after Smith and Hickock had been confined in
their Death Row cells almost two thousand days, the
Kansas Supreme Court decreed that their lives must end
between midnight and 2:00 A.M., Wednesday, April 14,
1965. Subsequently, a clemency appeal was presented to
the newly elected Governor of Kansas, William Avery; but
Avery, a rich farmer sensitive to public opinion, refused to
intervene—a decision he felt to be in the “best interest of
the people of Kansas.” (Two months later, Avery also
denied the clemency appeals of York and Latham, who
were hanged on June 22, 1965.)
And so it happened that in the daylight hours of that
Wednesday morning, Alvin Dewey, breakfasting in the
coffee shop of a Topeka hotel, read, on the first page of the
Kansas City Star, a headline he had long awaited: DIE ON
ROPE FOR BLOODY CRIME. The story, written by an Associated
Press reporter, began: “Richard Eugene Hickock and Perry
Edward Smith, partners in crime, died on the gallows at the
state prison early today for one of the bloodiest murders in
Kansas criminal annals. Hickock, 33 years old, died first, at
12:41 A.M.; Smith, 36, died at 1:19. . .”
Dewey had watched them die, for he had been among the
twenty-odd witnesses invited to the ceremony. He had
never attended an execution, and when on the midnight
past he entered the cold warehouse, the scenery had
surprised him: he had anticipated a setting of suitable
dignity, not this bleakly lighted cavern cluttered with lumber
and other debris. But the gallows itself, with its two pale
nooses attached to a crossbeam, was imposing enough;
and so, in an unexpected style, was the hangman, who cast
a long shadow from his perch on the platform at the top of
the wooden instrument’s thirteen steps. The hangman, an
anonymous, leathery gentleman who had been imported
from Missouri for the event, for which he was paid six
hundred dollars, was attired in an aged double-breasted
pin-striped suit overly commodious for the narrow figure
inside it—the coat came nearly to his knees; and on his
head he wore a cowboy hat which, when first bought, had
perhaps been bright green, but was now a weathered,
sweat-stained oddity.
Also, Dewey found the self-consciously casual conversation
of his fellow witnesses, as they stood awaiting the start of
what one witness termed “the festivities,” disconcerting.
“What Iheard was, they was gonna let them draw straws to
see who dropped first. Or flip a coin. But Smith says why
not do it alphabetically. Guess ’cause S comes after H.
Ha!”
“Read in the paper, afternoon paper, what they ordered for
their last meal? Ordered the same menu. Shrimp. French
fries. Garlic bread. Ice cream and strawberries and
whipped cream. Understand Smith didn’t touch his much.”
“That Hickock’s got a sense of humor. They was telling me
how, about an hour ago, one of the guards says to him,
‘This must be the longest night of your life.’ And Hickock, he
laughs and says, ‘No. The shortest.’ ”
“Did you hear about Hickock’s eyes? He left them to an eye
doctor. Soon as they cut him down, this doctor’s gonna
yank out his eyes and stick them in somebody else’s head.
Can’t say I’d want to be that somebody. I’d feel peculiar
with them eyes in my head.”
“Christ! Is that rain? All the windows down! My new Chevy.
Christ!”
The sudden rain rapped the high warehouse roof. The
sound, not unlike the rat-a-tat-tat of parade drums, heralded
Hickock’s arrival. Accompanied by six guards and a
prayer-murmuring chaplain, he entered the death place
handcuffed and wearing an ugly harness of leather straps
that bound his arms to his torso. At the foot of the gallows
the warden read to him the official order of execution, a
two-page document; and as the warden read, Hickock’s
eyes, enfeebled by half a decade of cell shadows, roamed
the little audience until, not seeing what he sought, he
asked the nearest guard, in a whisper, if any member of the
Clutter family was present. When he was told no, the
prisoner seemed disappointed, as though he thought the
protocol surrounding this ritual of vengeance was not being
properly observed.
As is customary, the warden, having finished his recitation,
asked the condemned man whether he had any last
statement to make. Hickock nodded. “Ijust want to say I
hold no hard feelings. You people are sending me to a
better world than this ever was”; then, as if to emphasize
the point, he shook hands with the four men mainly
responsible for his capture and conviction, all of whom had
requested permission to attend the executions: K.B.I.
Agents Roy Church, Clarence Duntz, Harold Nye, and
Dewey himself. “Nice to see you,” Hickock said with his
most charming smile; it was as if he were greeting guests
at his own funeral.
The hangman coughed—impatiently lifted his cowboy hat
and settled it again, a gesture somehow reminiscent of a
turkey buzzard huffing, then smoothing its neck feathers—
and Hickock, nudged by an attendant, mounted the scaffold
steps. “The Lord giveth, the Lord taketh away. Blessed is
the name of the Lord,” the chaplain intoned, as the rain
sound accelerated, as the noose was fitted, and as a
delicate black mask was tied round the prisoner’s eyes.
“May the Lord have mercy on your soul.” The trap door
opened, and Hickock hung for all to see a full twenty
minutes before the prison doctor at last said, “Ipronounce
this man dead.” A hearse, its blazing headlights beaded
with rain, drove into the warehouse, and the body, placed
on a litter and shrouded under a blanket, was carried to the
hearse and out into the night.
Staring after it, Roy Church shook his head: “Inever would
have believed he had the guts. To take it like he did. Ihad
him tagged a coward.”
The man to whom he spoke, another detective, said, “Aw,
Roy. The guy was a punk. A mean bastard. He deserved it.”
Church, with thoughtful eyes, continued to shake his head.
While waiting for the second execution, a reporter and a
guard conversed. The reporter said, “This your first
hanging?”
“Iseen Lee Andrews.”
“This here’s my first.”
“Yeah. How’d you like it?”
The reporter pursed his lips. “Nobody in our office wanted
the assignment. Me either. But it wasn’t as bad as Ithought
it would be. Just like jumping off a diving board. Only with a
rope around your neck.”
“They don’t feel nothing. Drop, snap, and that’s it. They
don’t feel nothing.”
“Are you sure? Iwas standing right close. Icould hear him
gasping for breath.”
“Uh-huh, but he don’t feel nothing. Wouldn’t be humane if he
did.”
“Well. And Isuppose they feed them a lot of pills.
Sedatives.”
“Hell, no. Against the rules. Here comes Smith.”
“Gosh, Ididn’t know he was such a shrimp.”
“Yeah, he’s little. But so is a tarantula.”
As he was brought into the warehouse, Smith recognized
his old foe, Dewey; he stopped chewing a hunk of
Doublemint gum he had in his mouth, and grinned and
winked at Dewey, jaunty and mischievous. But after the
warden asked if he had anything to say, his expression was
sober. His sensitive eyes gazed gravely at the surrounding
faces, swerved up to the shadowy hangman, then
downward to his own manacled hands. He looked at his
fingers, which were stained with ink and paint, for he’d
spent his final three years on Death Row painting self-
portraits and pictures of children, usually the children of
inmates who supplied him with photographs of their
seldom-seen progeny. “Ithink,” he said, “it’s a helluva thing
to take a life in this manner. Idon’t believe in capital
punishment, morally or legally. Maybe Ihad something to
contribute, something—” His assurance faltered; shyness
blurred his voice, lowered it to a just audible level. “It would
be meaningless to apologize for what Idid. Even
inappropriate. But Ido. Iapologize.”
Steps, noose, mask; but before the mask was adjusted, the
prisoner spat his chewing gum into the chaplain’s
outstretched palm. Dewey shut his eyes; he kept them shut
until he heard the thud-snap that announces a rope-broken
neck. Like the majority of American law-enforcement
officials, Dewey is certain that capital punishment is a
deterrent to violent crime, and he felt that if ever the penalty
had been earned, the present instance was it. The
preceding execution had not disturbed him, he had never
had much use for Hickock, who seemed to him “a small-
time chiseler who got out of his depth, empty and
worthless.” But Smith, though he was the true murderer,
aroused another response, for Perry possessed a quality,
the aura of an exiled animal, a creature walking wounded,
that the detective could not disregard. He remembered his
first meeting with Perry in the interrogation room at Police
Headquarters in Las Vegas—the dwarfish boy-man seated
in the metal chair, his small booted feet not quite brushing
the floor. And when Dewey now opened his eyes, that is
what he saw: the same childish feet, tilted, dangling.
Dewey had imagined that with the deaths of Smith and
Hickock, he would experience a sense of climax, release,
of a design justly completed. Instead, he discovered himself
recalling an incident of almost a year ago, a casual
encounter in Valley View Cemetery, which, in retrospect,
had somehow for him more or less ended the Clutter case.
The pioneers who founded Garden City were necessarily a
Spartan people, but when the time came to establish a
formal cemetery, they were determined, despite arid soil
and the troubles of transporting water, to create a rich
contrast to the dusty streets, the austere plains. The result,
which they named Valley View, is situated above the town
on a plateau of modest altitude. Seen today, it is a dark
island lapped by the undulating surf of surrounding wheat
fields—a good refuge from a hot day, for there are many
cool paths unbrokenly shaded by trees planted generations
ago.
One afternoon the previous May, a month when the fields
blaze with the green-gold fire of half-grown wheat, Dewey
had spent several hours at Valley View weeding his father’s
grave, an obligation he had too long neglected. Dewey was
fifty-one, four years older than when he had supervised the
Clutter investigation; but he was still lean and agile, and still
the K.B.I.’s principal agent in western Kansas; only a week
earlier he had caught a pair of cattle rustlers. The dream of
settling on his farm had not come true, for his wife’s fear of
living in that sort of isolation had never lessened. Instead,
the Deweys had built a new house in town; they were proud
of it, and proud, too, of both their sons, who were deep-
voiced now and as tall as their father. The older boy was
headed for college in the autumn.
When he had finished weeding, Dewey strolled along the
quiet paths. He stopped at a tombstone marked with a
recently carved name: Tate. Judge Tate had died of
pneumonia the past November; wreaths, brown roses, and
rain-faded ribbons still lay upon the raw earth. Close by,
fresher petals spilled across a newer mound—the grave of
Bonnie Jean Ashida, the Ashidas’ elder daughter, who
while visiting Garden City had been killed in a car collision.
Deaths, births, marriages—why, just the other day he’d
heard that Nancy Clutter’s boy friend, young Bobby Rupp,
had gone and got married.
The graves of the Clutter family, four graves gathered under
a single gray stone, lie in a far corner of the cemetery—
beyond the trees, out in the sun, almost at the wheat field’s
bright edge. As Dewey approached them, he saw that
another visitor was already there: a willowy girl with white-
gloved hands, a smooth cap of dark-honey hair, and long,
elegant legs. She smiled at him, and he wondered who she
was.
“Have you forgotten me, Mr. Dewey? Susan Kidwell.”
He laughed; she joined him. “Sue Kidwell. I’ll be darned.”
He hadn’t seen her since the trial; she had been a child
then. “How are you? How’s your mother?”
“Fine, thank you. She’s still teaching music at the Holcomb
School.”
“Haven’t been that way lately. Any changes?”
“Oh, there’s some talk about paving the streets. But you
know Holcomb. Actually, Idon’t spend much time there.
This is my junior year at K.U.,” she said, meaning the
University of Kansas. “I’m just home for a few days.”
“That’s wonderful, Sue. What are you studying?”
“Everything. Art, mostly. Ilove it. I’m really happy.” She
glanced across the prairie. “Nancy and Iplanned to go to
college together. We were going to be roommates. Ithink
about it sometimes. Suddenly, when I’m very happy, Ithink
of all the plans we made.”
Dewey looked at the gray stone inscribed with four names,
and the date of their death: November 15, 1959. “Do you
come here often?”
“Once in a while. Gosh, the sun’s strong.” She covered her
eyes with tinted glasses. “Remember Bobby Rupp? He
married a beautiful girl.”
“So Iheard.”
“Colleen Whitehurst. She’s really beautiful. And very nice,
too.”
“Good for Bobby.” And to tease her, Dewey added, “But
how about you? You must have a lot of beaus.”
“Well. Nothing serious. But that reminds me. Do you have
the time? Oh,” she cried, when he told her it was past four,
“I’ve got to run! But it was nice to have seen you, Mr.
Dewey.”
“And nice to have seen you, Sue. Good luck,” he called
after her as she disappeared down the path, a pretty girl in
a hurry, her smooth hair swinging, shining—just such a
young woman as Nancy might have been. Then, starting
home, he walked toward the trees, and under them, leaving
behind him the big sky, the whisper of wind voices in the
wind-bent wheat.
THE END
THE MODERN LIBRARY EDITORIAL BOARD
Maya Angelou
•
Daniel J. Boorstin
•
A. S. Byatt
•
Caleb Carr
•
Christopher Cerf
•
Ron Chernow
•
Shelby Foote
•
Vartan Gregorian
•
Charles Johnson
•
Mary Karr
•
Jon Krakauer
•
Edmund Morris
•
Michael Ondaatje
•
Elaine Pagels
•
David Remnick
•
John Richardson
•
Arthur Schlesinger, Jr.
•
Carolyn See
•
William Styron
•
Gore Vidal
IV
THE CORNER
Institutional dourness and cheerful domesticity coexist on
the fourth floor of the Finney County Courthouse. The
presence of the county jail supplies the first quality, while
the so-called Sheriff’s Residence, a pleasant apartment
separated from the jail proper by steel doors and a short
corridor, accounts for the second.
In January, 1960, the Sheriff’s Residence was not in fact
occupied by the sheriff, Earl Robinson, but by the
undersheriff and his wife, Wendle and Josephine (“Josie”)
Meier. The Meiers, who had been married more than
twenty years, were very much alike: tall people with weight
and strength to spare, with wide hands, square and calm
and kindly faces—the last being most true of Mrs. Meier, a
direct and practical woman who nevertheless seems
illuminated by a mystical serenity. As the undersheriff’s
helpmate her hours are long; between five in the morning,
when she begins the day by reading a chapter in the Bible,
and 10:00 P.M., her bedtime, she cooks and sews for the
prisoners, darns, does their laundry, takes splendid care of
her husband, and looks after their five-room apartment, with
its gemütlich mélange of plump hassocks and squashy
chairs and cream-colored lace window curtains. The
Meiers have a daughter, an only child, who is married and
lives in Kansas City, so the couple live alone—or, as Mrs.
Meier more correctly puts it: “Alone except for whoever
happens to be in the ladies’ cell.”
The jail contains six cells; the sixth, the one reserved for
female prisoners, is actually an isolated unit situated inside
the Sheriff’s Residence—indeed, it adjoins the Meiers’
kitchen. “But,” says Josie Meier, “that don’t worry me. I
enjoy the company. Having somebody to talk to while I’m
doing my kitchen work. Most of these women, you got to
feel sorry for them. Just met up with Old Man Trouble is all.
Course Hickock and Smith was a different matter. Far as I
know, Perry Smith was the first man ever stayed in the
ladies’ cell. The reason was, the sheriff wanted to keep him
and Hickock separated from each other until after their trial.
The afternoon they brought them in, Imade six apple pies
and baked some bread and all the while kept track of the
goings-on down there on the Square. My kitchen window
overlooks the Square; you couldn’t want a better view. I’m
no judge of crowds, but I’d guess there were several
hundred people waiting to see the boys that killed the
Clutter family. Inever met any of the Clutters myself, but
from everything I’ve ever heard about them they must have
been very fine people. What happened to them is hard to
forgive, and Iknow Wendle was worried how the crowd
might act when they caught sight of Hickock and Smith. He
was afraid somebody might try to get at them. So Ikind of
had my heart in my mouth when Isaw the cars arrive, saw
the reporters, all the newspaper fellows running and
pushing; but by then it was dark, after six, and bitter cold—
more than half the crowd had given up and gone home. The
ones that stayed, they didn’t say boo. Only stared.
“Later, when they brought the boys upstairs, the first one I
saw was Hickock. He had on light summer pants and just
an old cloth shirt. Surprised he didn’t catch pneumonia,
considering how cold it was. But he looked sick all right.
White as a ghost. Well, it must be a terrible experience—to
be stared at by a horde of strangers, to have to walk among
them, and them knowing who you are and what you did.
Then they brought up Smith. Ihad some supper ready to
serve them in their cells, hot soup and coffee and some
sandwiches and pie. Ordinarily, we feed just twice a day.
Breakfast at seven-thirty, and at four-thirty we serve the
main meal. But Ididn’t want those fellows going to bed on
an empty stomach; seemed to me they must be feeling bad
enough without that. But when Itook Smith his supper,
carried it in on a tray, he said he wasn’t hungry. He was
looking out the window of the ladies’ cell. Standing with his
back to me. That window has the same view as my kitchen
window: trees and the Square and the tops of houses. Itold
him, ‘Just taste the soup, it’s vegetable, and not out of a
can. Imade it myself. The pie, too.’ In about an hour Iwent
back for the tray and he hadn’t touched a crumb. He was
still at the window. Like he hadn’t moved. It was snowing,
and Iremember saying it was the first snow of the year, and
how we’d had such a beautiful long autumn right till then.
And now the snow had come. And then Iasked him if he
had any special dish he liked; if he did I’d try and fix it for
him the next day. He turned round and looked at me.
Suspicious, like Imight be mocking him. Then he said
something about a movie—he had such a quiet way of
speaking, almost a whisper. Wanted to know if Ihad seen a
movie. Iforget the name, anyway Ihadn’t seen it: never
have been much for picture shows. He said this show took
place in Biblical times, and there was a scene where a man
was flung off a balcony, thrown to a mob of men and
women, who tore him to pieces. And he said that was what
came to mind when he saw the crowd on the Square. The
man being torn apart. And the idea that maybe that was
what they might do to him. Said it scared him so bad his
stomach still hurt. Which was why he couldn’t eat. Course
he was wrong, and Itold him so—nobody was going to
harm him, regardless of what he’d done; folks around here
aren’t like that.
“We talked some, he was very shy, but after a while he
said, ‘One thing Ireally like is Spanish rice.’ So Ipromised
to make him some, and he smiled kind of, and Idecided—
well, he wasn’t the worst young man Iever saw. That night,
after I’d gone to bed, Isaid as much to my husband. But
Wendle snorted. Wendle was one of the first on the scene
after the crime was discovered. He said he wished I’d been
out at the Clutter place when they found the bodies. Then I
could’ve judged for myself just how gentle Mr. Smith was.
Him and his friend Hickock. He said they’d cut out your
heart and never bat an eye. There was no denying it—not
with four people dead. And Ilay awake wondering if either
one was bothered by it—the thought of those four graves.”
Amonth passed, and another, and it snowed some part of
almost every day. Snow whitened the wheat-tawny
countryside, heaped the streets of the town, hushed them.
The topmost branches of a snow-laden elm brushed
against the window of the ladies’ cell. Squirrels lived in the
tree, and after weeks of tempting them with leftover
breakfast scraps, Perry lured one off a branch onto the
window sill and through the bars. It was a male squirrel with
auburn fur. He named it Red, and Red soon settled down,
apparently content to share his friend’s captivity. Perry
taught him several tricks: to play with a paper ball, to beg,
to perch on Perry’s shoulder. All this helped to pass time,
but still there were many long hours the prisoner had to
lose. He was not allowed to read newspapers, and he was
bored by the magazines Mrs. Meier lent him: old issues of
Good Housekeeping and McCall’s. But he found things to
do: file his fingernails with an emery board, buff them to a
silky pink sheen; comb and comb his lotion-soaked and
scented hair; brush his teeth three and four times a day;
shave and shower almost as often. And he kept the cell,
which contained a toilet, a shower stall, a cot, a chair, a
table, as neat as his person. He was proud of a compliment
Mrs. Meier had paid him. “Look!” she had said, pointing at
his bunk. “Look at that blanket! You could bounce dimes.”
But it was at the table that he spent most of his waking life;
he ate his meals there, it was where he sat when he
sketched portraits of Red, drew flowers, and the face of
Jesus, and the faces and torsos of imaginary women; and it
was where, on cheap sheets of ruled paper, he made diary-
like notes of day-to-day occurrences.
Thursday 7 January. Dewey here. Brought carton
cigarettes. Also typed copies of Statement for my
signature. I declined.
The “Statement,” a seventy-eight-page document which he
had dictated to the Finney County court stenographer,
recounted admissions already made to Alvin Dewey and
Clarence Duntz. Dewey, speaking of his encounter with
Perry Smith on this particular day, remembered that he had
been very surprised when Perry refused to sign the
statement. “It wasn’t important: Icould always testify in court
as to the oral confession he’d made to Duntz and myself.
And of course Hickock had given us a signed confession
while we were still in Las Vegas—the one in which he
accused Smith of having committed all four murders. But I
was curious. Iasked Perry why he’d changed his mind. And
he said, ‘Everything in my statement is accurate except for
two details. If you’ll let me correct those items then I’ll sign
it.’ Well, Icould guess the items he meant. Because the
only serious difference between his story and Hickock’s
was that he denied having executed the Clutters single-
handed. Until now he’d sworn Hickock killed Nancy and her
mother.
“And Iwas right!—that’s just what he wanted to do: admit
that Hickock had been telling the truth, and that it was he,
Perry Smith, who had shot and killed the whole family. He
said he’d lied about it because, in his words, ‘Iwanted to fix
Dick for being such a coward. Dropping his guts all over
the goddam floor.’ And the reason he’d decided to set the
record straight wasn’t that he suddenly felt any kinder
toward Hickock. According to him he was doing it out of
consideration for Hickock’s parents—said he was sorry for
Dick’s mother. Said, ‘She’s a real sweet person. It might be
some comfort to her to know Dick never pulled the trigger.
None of it would have happened without him, in a way it
was mostly his fault, but the fact remains I’m the one who
killed them.’ But Iwasn’t certain Ibelieved it. Not to the
extent of letting him alter his statement. As Isay, we weren’t
dependent on a formal confession from Smith to prove any
part of our case. With or without it, we had enough to hang
them ten times over.”
Among the elements contributing to Dewey’s confidence
was the recovery of the radio and pair of binoculars the
murderers had stolen from the Clutter house and
subsequently disposed of in Mexico City (where, having
flown there for the purpose, K.B.I. Agent Harold Nye traced
them to a pawnshop). Moreover, Smith, while dictating his
statement, had revealed the whereabouts of other potent
evidence. “We hit the highway and drove east,” he’d said,
in the process of describing what he and Hickock had done
after fleeing the murder scene. “Drove like hell, Dick
driving. Ithink we both felt very high. Idid. Very high, and
very relieved at the same time. Couldn’t stop laughing,
neither one of us; suddenly it all seemed very funny—Idon’t
know why, it just did. But the gun was dripping blood, and
my clothes were stained; there was even blood in my hair.
So we turned off onto a country road, and drove maybe
eight miles till we were way out on the prairie. You could
hear coyotes. We smoked a cigarette, and Dick went on
making jokes about what had happened back there. Igot
out of the car, and siphoned some water out of the water
tank and washed the blood off the gun barrel. Then I
scraped a hole in the ground with Dick’s hunting knife, the
one Iused on Mr. Clutter, and buried in it the empty shells
and all the leftover nylon cord and adhesive tape. After that
we drove till we came to U.S. 83, and headed east toward
Kansas City and Olathe. Around dawn Dick stopped at one
of those picnic places: what they call rest areas—where
they have open fireplaces. We built a fire and burned stuff.
The gloves we’d worn, and my shirt. Dick said he wished
we had an ox to roast; he said he’d never been so hungry. It
was almost noon when we got to Olathe. Dick dropped me
at my hotel, and went on home to have Sunday dinner with
his family. Yes, he took the knife with him. The gun, too.”
K.B.I. agents, dispatched to Hickock’s home, found the
knife inside a fishing-tackle box and the shotgun still
casually propped against a kitchen wall. (Hickock’s father,
who refused to believe his “boy” could have taken part in
such a “horrible crime,” insisted the gun hadn’t been out of
the house since the first week in November, and therefore
could not be the death weapon). As for the empty cartridge
shells, the cord and tape, these were retrieved with the aid
of Virgil Pietz, a county-highway employee, who, working
with a road grader in the area pinpointed by Perry Smith,
shaved away the earth inch by inch until the buried articles
were uncovered. Thus the last loose strings were tied; the
K.B.I. had now assembled an unshakable case, for tests
established that the shells had been discharged by
Hickock’s shotgun, and the remnants of cord and tape were
of a piece with the materials used to bind and silence the
victims.
Monday 11 January. Have a lawyer. Mr. Fleming. Old
man with red tie.
Informed by the defendants that they were without funds to
hire legal counsel, the court, in the person of Judge Roland
H. Tate, appointed as their representatives two local
lawyers, Mr. Arthur Fleming and Mr. Harrison Smith.
Fleming, seventy-one, a former mayor of Garden City, a
short man who enlivens an unsensational appearance with
rather conspicuous neckwear, resisted the assignment. “I
do not desire to serve,” he told the judge. “But if the court
sees fit to appoint me, then of course Ihave no choice.”
Hickock’s attorney, Harrison Smith, forty-five, six feet tall, a
golfer, an Elk of exalted degree, accepted the task with
resigned grace: “Someone has to do it. And I’ll do my best.
Though Idoubt that’ll make me too popular around here.”
Friday 15 January. Mrs. Meier playing radio in her kitchen
and I heard man say the county attorney will seek Death
Penalty. “The rich never hang. Only the poor and
friendless.”
In making his announcement, the county attorney, Duane
West, an ambitious, portly young man of twenty-eight who
looks forty and sometimes fifty, told newsmen, “If the case
goes before a jury, Iwill request the jury, upon finding them
guilty, to sentence them to the death penalty. If the
defendants waive right to jury trial and enter a plea of guilty
before the judge, Iwill request the judge to set the death
penalty. This was a matter Iknew Iwould be called upon to
decide, and my decision has not been arrived at lightly. I
feel that due to the violence of the crime and the apparent
utter lack of mercy shown the victims, the only way the
public can be absolutely protected is to have the death
penalty set against these defendants. This is especially true
since in Kansas there is no such thing as life imprisonment
without possibility of parole. Persons sentenced to life
imprisonment actually serve, on the average, less then
fifteen years.”
Wednesday 20 January. Asked to take lie-detector in
regards to this Walker deal.
A case like the Clutter case, crimes of that magnitude,
arouse the interest of lawmen everywhere, particularly
those investigators burdened with unsolved but similar
crimes, for it is always possible that the solution to one
mystery will solve another. Among the many officers
intrigued by events in Garden City was the sheriff of
Sarasota County, Florida, which includes Osprey, a fishing
settlement not far from Tampa, and the scene, slightly more
than a month after the Clutter tragedy, of the quadruple
slaying on an isolated cattle ranch which Smith had read
about in a Miami newspaper on Christmas Day. The
victims were again four members of a family: a young
couple, Mr. and Mrs. Clifford Walker, and their two children,
a boy and a girl, all of whom had been shot in the head with
a rifle. Since the Clutter murderers had spent the night of
December 19, the date of the murders, in a Tallahassee
hotel, Osprey’s sheriff, who had no other leads whatever,
was understandably anxious to have the two men
questioned and a polygraph examination administered.
Hickock consented to take the test and so did Smith, who
told Kansas authorities, “Iremarked at the time, Isaid to
Dick, I’ll bet whoever did this must be somebody that read
about what happened out here in Kansas. A nut.” The
results of the test, to the dismay of Osprey’s sheriff as well
as Alvin Dewey, who does not believe in exceptional
coincidences, were decisively negative. The murderer of
the Walker family remains unknown.
Sunday 31 January. Dick’s dad here to visit Dick. Said
hello when I sawhim go past [the cell door] but he kept
going. Could be he never heard me. Understand from
Mrs. M [Meier] that Mrs. H [Hickock] didn’t come because
she felt too bad to. Snowing like a bitch. Dreamed last
night I was up in Alaska with Dad—woke up in a puddle of
cold urine!!!
Mr. Hickock spent three hours with his son. Afterward he
walked through the snow to the Garden City depot, a work-
worn old man, stooped and thinned-down by the cancer that
would kill him a few months hence. At the station, while
waiting for a homeward-bound train, he spoke to a reporter:
“Iseen Dick, uh-huh. We had a long talk. And Ican
guarantee you it’s not like people say. Or what’s put in the
papers. Those boys didn’t go to that house planning to do
violence. My boy didn’t. He may have some bad sides, but
he’s nowhere near bad as that. Smitty’s the one. Dick told
me he didn’t even know it when Smitty attacked the man
[Mr. Clutter], cut his throat. Dick wasn’t even in the same
room. He only run in when he heard them struggling. Dick
was carrying his shotgun, and how he described it was:
‘Smitty took my shotgun and just blew that man’s head off.’
And he says, ‘Dad, Iought to have grabbed back the gun
and shot Smitty dead. Killed him ’fore he killed the rest of
that family. If I’d done it I’d be better off than Iam now.’ I
guess he would, too. How it is, the way folks feel, he don’t
stand no chance. They’ll hang them both. And,” he added,
fatigue and defeat glazing his eyes, “having your boy hang,
knowing he will, nothing worse can happen to a man.”
Neither Perry Smith’s father nor sister wrote him or came to
see him. Tex John Smith was presumed to be prospecting
for gold somewhere in Alaska—though lawmen, despite
great effort, had been unable to locate him. The sister had
told investigators that she was afraid of her brother, and
requested that they please not let him know her present
address. (When informed of this, Smith smiled slightly and
said, “Iwish she’d been in that house that night. What a
sweet scene!”)
Except for the squirrel, except for the Meiers and an
occasional consultation with his lawyer, Mr. Fleming, Perry
was very much alone. He missed Dick. Many thoughts of
Dick, he wrote one day in his makeshift diary. Since their
arrest they had not been allowed to communicate, and that,
freedom aside, was what he most desired—to talk to Dick,
be with him again. Dick was not the “hardrock” he’d once
thought him: “pragmatic,” “virile,” “a real brass boy”; he’d
proven himself to be “pretty weak and shallow,” “a coward.”
Still, of everyone in all the world, this was the person to
whom he was closest at that moment, for they at least were
of the same species, brothers in the breed of Cain;
separated from him, Perry felt “all by myself. Like
somebody covered with sores. Somebody only a big nut
would have anything to do with.”
But then one mid-February morning Perry received a letter.
It was postmarked Reading, Mass., and it read:
Dear Perry, Iwas sorry to hear about the trouble you are
in and Idecided to write and let you know that Iremember
you and would like to help you in any way that Ican. In case
you don’t remember my name, Don Cullivan, I’ve enclosed
a picture taken at about the time we met. When Ifirst read
about you in the news recently Iwas startled and then I
began to think back to those days when Iknew you. While
we were never close personal friends Ican remember you
a lot more clearly than most fellows Imet in the Army. It
must have been about the fall of 1951 when you were
assigned to the 761st Engineer Light Equipment Company
at Fort Lewis, Washington. You were short (I’m not much
taller), solidly built, dark with a heavy shock of black hair
and a grin on your face almost all the time. Since you had
lived in Alaska quite a few of the fellows used to call you
“Eskimo.” One of my first recollections of you was at a
Company inspection in which all the footlockers were open
for inspection. As Irecall it all the footlockers were in order,
even yours, except that the inside cover of your footlocker
was plastered with pictures of pin-up girls. The rest of us
were sure you were in for trouble. But the inspecting officer
took it in stride and when it was all over and he let it pass I
think we all felt you were a nervy guy. Iremember that you
were a fairly good pool player and Ican picture you quite
clearly in the Company day room at the pool table. You
were one of the best truck drivers in the outfit. Remember
the Army field problems we went out on? On one trip that
took place in the winter Iremember that we each were
assigned to a truck for the duration of the problem. In our
outfit, Army trucks had no heaters and it used to get pretty
cold in those cabs. Iremember you cutting a hole in the
floor-boards of your truck in order to let the heat from the
engine come into the cab. The reason Iremember this so
well is the impression it made on me because “mutilation”
of Army property was a crime for which you could get
severely punished. Of course Iwas pretty green in the Army
and probably afraid to stretch the rules even a little bit, but I
can remember you grinning about it (and keeping warm)
while Iworried about it (and froze). Irecall that you bought a
motorcycle, and vaguely remember you had some trouble
with it—chased by the police?—crackup? Whatever it was,
it was the first time Irealized the wild streak in you. Some of
my recollections may be wrong; this was over eight years
ago and Ionly knew you for a period of about eight months.
From what Iremember, though, Igot along with you very
well and rather liked you. You always seemed cheerful and
cocky, you were good at your Army work and Ican’t
remember that you did much griping. Of course you were
apparently quite wild but Inever knew too much about that.
But now you are in real trouble. Itry to imagine what you are
like now. What you think about. When first Iread about you I
was stunned. Ireally was. But then Iput the paper down and
turned to something else. But the thought of you returned. I
wasn’t satisfied just to forget. Iam, or try to be, fairly
religious [Catholic]. Iwasn’t always. Iused to just drift along
with little thought about the only important thing there is. I
never considered death or the possibility of a life hereafter.
Iwas too much alive: car, college, dating, etc. But my kid
brother died of leukemia when he was just 17 years old. He
knew he was dying and afterwards Iused to wonder what
he thought about. And now Ithink of you, and wonder what
you think about. Ididn’t know what to say to my brother in
the last weeks before he died. But Iknow what I’d say now.
And this is why Iam writing you: because God made you as
well as me and He loves you just as He loves me, and for
the little we know of God’s will what has happened to you
could have happened to me. Your friend, Don Cullivan.
The name meant nothing, but Perry at once recognized the
face in the photograph of a young soldier with crew-cut hair
and round, very earnest eyes. He read the letter many
times; though he found the religious allusions unpersuasive
(“I’ve tried to believe, but Idon’t, Ican’t, and there’s no use
pretending”), he was thrilled by it. Here was someone
offering help, a sane and respectable man who had once
known and liked him, a man who signed himself friend.
Gratefully, in great haste, he started a reply: “Dear Don, Hell
yes Iremember Don Cullivan . . .”
Hickock’s cell had no window; he faced a wide corridor
and the façades of other cells. But he was not isolated,
there were people to talk to, a plentiful turnover of
drunkards, forgers, wife-beaters, and Mexican vagrants;
and Dick, with his light-hearted “con-man” patter, his sex
anecdotes and gamy jokes, was popular with the inmates
(though there was one who had no use for him whatever—
an old man who hissed at him: “Killer! Killer!” and who once
drenched him with a bucketful of dirty scrubwater).
Outwardly, Hickock seemed to one and all an unusually
untroubled young man. When he was not socializing or
sleeping, he lay on his cot smoking or chewing gum and
reading sports magazines or paperback thrillers. Often he
simply lay there whistling old favorites (“You Must Have
Been a Beautiful Baby,” “Shuffle Off to Buffalo”), and staring
at an unshaded light bulb that burned day and night in the
ceiling of the cell. He hated the light bulb’s monotonous
surveillance; it disturbed his sleep and, more explicitly,
endangered the success of a private project—escape. For
the prisoner was not as unconcerned as he appeared to
be, or as resigned; he intended taking every step possible
to avoid “a ride on the Big Swing.” Convinced that such a
ceremony would be the outcome of any trial—certainly any
trial held in the State of Kansas—he had decided to “bust
jail. Grab a car and raise dust.” But first he must have a
weapon; and over a period of weeks he’d been making
one: a “shiv,” an instrument very like an icepick—something
that would fit with lethal niceness between the shoulder-
blades of Undersheriff Meier. The weapon’s components, a
piece of wood and a length of hard wire, were originally
part of a toilet brush he’d confiscated, dismantled and
hidden under his mattress. Late at night, when the only
noises were snores and coughs and the mournful whistle-
wailings of Santa Fe trains rumbling through the darkened
town, he honed the wire against the cell’s concrete floor.
And while he worked he schemed.
Once, the first winter after he had finished high school,
Hickock had hitchhiked across Kansas and Colorado:
“This was when Iwas looking for a job. Well, Iwas riding in
a truck, and the driver, me and him got into a little
argument, no reason exactly, but he beat up on me. Shoved
me out. Just left me there. High the hell up in the Rockies. It
was sleeting like, and Iwalked miles, my nose bleeding like
fifteen pigs. Then Icome to a bunch of cabins on a wooded
slope. Summer cabins, all locked up and empty that time of
year. And Ibroke into one of them. There was firewood and
canned goods, even some whiskey. Ilaid up there over a
week, and it was one of the best times Iever knew. Despite
the fact my nose hurt so and my eyes were green and
yellow. And when the snow stopped the sun came out. You
never saw such skies. Like Mexico. If Mexico was in a cold
climate. Ihunted through the other cabins and found some
smoked hams and a radio and a rifle. It was great. Out all
day with a gun. With the sun in my face. Boy, Ifelt good. I
felt like Tarzan. And every night Iate beans and fried ham
and rolled up in a blanket by the fire and fell asleep listening
to music on the radio. Nobody came near the place. Ibet I
could’ve stayed till spring.” If the escape succeeded, that
was the course Dick had determined upon—to head for the
Colorado mountains, and find there a cabin where he could
hide until spring (alone, of course; Perry’s future did not
concern him). The prospect of so idyllic an interim added to
the inspired stealth with which he whetted his wire, filed it to
a limber stiletto fineness.
Thursday 10 March. Sheriff had a shake-out. Searched
through all the cells and found a shiv tucked under D’s
mattress. Wonder what he had in mind (smile).
Not that Perry really considered it a smiling matter, for Dick,
flourishing a dangerous weapon, could have played a
decisive role in plans he himself was forming. As the weeks
went by he had become familiar with life on Courthouse
Square, its habitués and their habits. The cats, for example:
the two thin gray toms who appeared with every twilight and
prowled the Square, stopping to examine the cars parked
around its periphery—behavior puzzling to him until Mrs.
Meier explained that the cats were hunting for dead birds
caught in the vehicles’ engine grilles. Thereafter it pained
him to watch their maneuvers: “Because most of my life I’ve
done what they’re doing. The equivalent.”
And there was one man of whom Perry had grown
especially aware, a robust, upright gentleman with hair like
a gray-and-silver skullcap; his face, filled out, firm-jawed,
was somewhat cantankerous in repose, the mouth down-
curved, the eyes downcast as though in mirthless reverie—
a picture of unsparing sternness. And yet this was at least a
partially inaccurate impression, for now and again the
prisoner glimpsed him as he paused to talk to other men,
joke with them and laugh, and then he seemed carefree,
jovial, generous: “The kind of person who might see the
human side”—an important attribute, for the man was
Roland H. Tate, Judge of the 32nd Judicial District, the
jurist who would preside at the trial of the State of Kansas
versus Smith and Hickock. Tate, as Perry soon learned,
was an old and awesome name in western Kansas. The
judge was rich, he raised horses, he owned much land, and
his wife was said to be very beautiful. He was the father of
two sons, but the younger had died, a tragedy that greatly
affected the parents and led them to adopt a small boy who
had appeared in court as an abandoned, homeless child.
“He sounds soft-hearted to me,” Perry once said to Mrs.
Meier. “Maybe he’ll give us a break.”
But that was not what Perry really believed; he believed
what he’d written Don Cullivan, with whom he now
corresponded regularly: his crime was “unforgivable,” and
he fully expected to “climb those thirteen steps.” However,
he was not altogether without hope, for he too had plotted
an escape. It depended upon a pair of young men that he
had often observed observing him. One was red-haired, the
other dark. Sometimes, standing in the Square under the
tree that touched the cell window, they smiled and signaled
to him—or so he imagined. Nothing was ever said, and
always, after perhaps a minute, they drifted away. But the
prisoner had convinced himself that the young men,
possibly motivated by a desire for adventure, meant to help
him escape. Accordingly, he drew a map of the Square,
indicating the points at which a “getaway car” could most
advantageously be stationed. Beneath the map he wrote: I
need a HacksawBlade 5”. Nothing else. But do you
realize the consequences if you get caught (nod your
head if you do)? It could mean a long stretch in prison. Or
you might get killed. All for someone you don’t know. YOU
BETTER THINK IT OVER!! Seriously! Besides, howdo I
knowI can trust you? Howdo I knowit isn’t a trick to get me
out there and gun me down? What about Hickock? All
preparations must include him.
Perry kept this document on his desk, wadded and ready to
drop out the window the next time the young men
appeared. But they never did; he never saw them again.
Eventually, he wondered if perhaps he had invented them
(a notion that he “might not be normal, maybe insane” had
troubled him “even when Iwas little, and my sisters laughed
because Iliked moonlight. To hide in the shadows and
watch the moon”). Phantoms or not, he ceased to think of
the young men. Another method of escape, suicide,
replaced them in his musings; and despite the jailer’s
precautions (no mirror, no belt or tie or shoelaces), he had
devised a way to do it. For he also was furnished with a
ceiling bulb that burned eternally, but, unlike Hickock, he
had in his cell a broom, and by pressing the broom-brush
against the bulb he could unscrew it. One night he dreamed
that he’d unscrewed the bulb, broken it, and with the broken
glass cut his wrists and ankles. “Ifelt all breath and light
leaving me,” he said, in a subsequent description of his
sensations. “The walls of the cell fell away, the sky came
down, Isaw the big yellow bird.”
Throughout his life—as a child, poor and meanly treated, as
a foot-loose youth, as an imprisoned man—the yellow bird,
huge and parrot-faced, had soared across Perry’s dreams,
an avenging angel who savaged his enemies or, as now,
rescued him in moments of mortal danger: “She lifted me, I
could have been light as a mouse, we went up, up, Icould
see the Square below, men running, yelling, the sheriff
shooting at us, everybody sore as hell because Iwas free, I
was flying, Iwas better than any of them.”
The trial was scheduled to start on March 22, 1960. In the
weeks preceding that date the defense attorneys frequently
consulted the defendants. The advisability of requesting a
change of venue was discussed, but as the elderly Mr.
Fleming warned his client, “It wouldn’t matter where in
Kansas the trial was held. Sentiment’s the same all over the
state. We’re probably better off in Garden City. This is a
religious community. Eleven thousand population and
twenty-two churches. And most of the ministers are
opposed to capital punishment, say it’s immoral,
unchristian; even the Reverend Cowan, the Clutters’ own
minister and a close friend of the family, he’s been
preaching against the death penalty in this very case.
Remember, all we can hope is to save your lives. Ithink we
stand as good a chance here as anywhere.”
Soon after the original arraignment of Smith and Hickock,
their advocates appeared before Judge Tate to argue a
motion urging comprehensive psychiatric examinations for
the accused. Specifically, the court was asked to permit the
state hospital in Larned, Kansas, a mental institution with
maximum-security facilities, to take custody of the
prisoners for the purpose of ascertaining whether either or
both were “insane, imbeciles or idiots, unable to
comprehend their position and aid in their defense.”
Larned is a hundred miles east of Garden City; Hickock’s
attorney, Harrison Smith, informed the court that he had
driven there the previous day and conferred with several of
the hospital’s staff: “We have no qualified psychiatrists in
our own community. In fact, Larned is the only place within a
radius of two hundred and twenty-five miles where you’ll find
such men—doctors trained to make serious psychiatric
evaluations. That takes time. Four to eight weeks. But the
personnel with whom Idiscussed the matter said they were
willing to start work at once; and, of course, being a state
institution it won’t cost the county a nickel.”
This plan was opposed by the special assistant
prosecuting attorney, Logan Green, who, certain that
“temporary insanity” was the defense his antagonists would
attempt to sustain in the forthcoming trial, feared that the
ultimate outcome of the proposal would be, as he predicted
in private conversation, the appearance on the witness
stand of a “pack of head-healers” sympathetic to the
defendants (“Those fellows, they’re always crying over the
killers. Never a thought for the victims”). Short, pugnacious,
a Kentuckian by birth, Green began by pointing out to the
court that Kansas’ law, in regard to sanity, adheres to the
M’Naghten Rule, the ancient British importation which
contends that if the accused knew the nature of his act, and
knew it was wrong, then he is mentally competent and
responsible for his actions. Furthermore, said Green, there
was nothing in the Kansas statutes indicating that the
physicians chosen to determine a defendant’s mental
condition must be of any particular qualification: “Just plain
doctors. Medical doctors in general practice. That’s all the
law requires. We have sanity hearings in this county every
year for the purpose of committing people to the institution.
We never call anybody in from Larned or psychiatric
institutions of any kind. Our own local physicians attend to
the matter. It’s no great job to find whether a man is insane
or an idiot or an imbecile . . . It is entirely unnecessary, a
waste of time to send the defendants to Larned.”
In rebuttal, Counsel Smith suggested that the present
situation was “far graver than a simple sanity hearing in
probate court. Two lives are at stake. Whatever their crime,
these men are entitled to examination by persons of
training and experience. Psychiatry,” he added, pleading
with the judge quite directly, “has matured rapidly in the
past twenty years. The Federal courts are beginning to
keep in tune with this science as related to people charged
with criminal offenses. It just seems to me we have a
golden opportunity to face up to the new concepts in this
field.”
It was an opportunity the judge preferred to reject, for as a
fellow jurist once remarked, “Tate is what you might call a
law-book lawyer, he never experiments, he goes strictly by
the text”; but the same critic also said of him, “If Iwere
innocent, he’s the first man I’d want on the bench; if Iwas
guilty, the last.” Judge Tate did not entirely deny the motion;
rather, he did exactly all the law demanded by appointing a
commission of three Garden City doctors and directing
them to pronounce a verdict upon the mental capacities of
the prisoners. (In due course the medical trio met the
accused and, after an hour or so of conversational prying,
announced that neither man suffered from any mental
disorder. When told of their diagnosis, Perry Smith said,
“How would they know? They just wanted to be entertained.
Hear all the morbid details from the killer’s own terrible lips.
Oh, their eyes were shining.” Hickock’s attorney was also
angry; once more he traveled to Larned State Hospital,
where he appealed for the unpaid services of a psychiatrist
willing to go to Garden City and interview the defendants.
The one man who volunteered, Dr. W. Mitchell Jones, was
exceptionally competent; not yet thirty, a sophisticated
specialist in criminal psychology and the criminally insane
who had worked and studied in Europe and the United
States, he agreed to examine Smith and Hickock, and,
should his findings warrant it, testify in their behalf.)
On the morning of March 14 counsels for the defense again
stood before Judge Tate, there on this occasion to plead
for a postponement of the trial, which was then eight days
distant. Two reasons were given, the first was that a “most
material witness,” Hickock’s father, was at present too ill to
testify. The second was a subtler matter. During the past
week a boldly lettered notice had begun to appear in the
town’s shop windows, and in banks, restaurants, and at the
railroad station; and it read: H. W. CLUTTER ESTATE AUCTION
SALE *21 MARCH 1960 * AT THE CLUTTER HOMESTEAD. “Now,”
said Harrison Smith, addressing the bench, “Irealize it is
almost impossible to prove prejudice. But this sale, an
auction of the victim’s estate, occurs one week from today
—in other words, the very day before the trial begins.
Whether that’s prejudicial to the defendants I’m not able to
state. But these signs, coupled with newspaper
advertisements, and advertisements on the radio, will be a
constant reminder to every citizen in the community, among
whom one hundred and fifty have been called as
prospective jurors.”
Judge Tate was not impressed. He denied the motion
without comment.
Earlier in the year Mr. Clutter’s Japanese neighbor, Hideo
Ashida, had auctioned his farming equipment and moved
to Nebraska. The Ashida sale, which was considered a
success, attracted not quite a hundred customers. Slightly
more than five thousand people attended the Clutter
auction. Holcomb’s citizenry expected an unusual turnout—
the Ladies’ Circle of the Holcomb Community Church had
converted one of the Clutter barns into a cafeteria stocked
with two hundred homemade pies, two hundred and fifty
pounds of hamburger meat, and sixty pounds of sliced ham
—but no one was prepared for the largest auction crowd in
the history of western Kansas. Cars converged on Holcomb
from half the counties in the state, and from Oklahoma,
Colorado, Texas, Nebraska. They came bumper to bumper
down the lane leading to River Valley Farm.
It was the first time the public had been permitted to visit
the Clutter place since the discovery of the murders, a
circumstance which explained the presence of perhaps a
third of the immense congregation—those who had come
out of curiosity. And of course the weather was an aid to
attendance, for by mid-March winter’s high snows have
dissolved, and the earth beneath, thoroughly thawed, has
emerged as acre upon acre of ankle-deep mud; there is
not much a farmer can do until the ground hardens. “Land’s
so wet and nasty,” said Mrs. Bill Ramsey, the wife of a
farmer. “Can’t work nohow. We figured we might as well
drive on out to the sale.” Actually, it was a beautiful day.
Spring. Though mud abounded underfoot, the sun, so long
shrouded by snow and cloud, seemed an object freshly
made, and the trees—Mr. Clutter’s orchard of pear and
apple trees, the elms shading the lane—were lightly veiled
in a haze of virginal green. The fine lawn surrounding the
Clutter house was also newly green, and trespassers upon
it, women anxious to have a closer look at the uninhabited
home, crept across the grass and peered through the
windows as though hopeful but fearful of discerning, in the
gloom beyond the pleasant flower-print curtains, grim
apparitions.
Shouting, the auctioneer praised his wares—tractors,
trucks, wheelbarrows, nail kegs and sledgehammers and
unused lumber, milk buckets, branding irons, horses,
horseshoes, everything needed to run a ranch from rope
and harness to sheep dip and tin washtubs—it was the
prospect of buying this merchandise at bargain prices that
had lured most of the crowd. But the hands of bidders
flickered shyly—work-roughened hands timid of parting with
hard-earned cash; yet nothing went unsold, there was even
someone keen to acquire a bunch of rusty keys, and a
youthful cowboy sporting pale-yellow boots bought Kenyon
Clutter’s “coyote wagon,” the dilapidated vehicle the dead
boy had used to harass coyotes, chase them on moonlit
nights.
The stagehands, the men who hauled the smaller items on
and off the auctioneer’s podium, were Paul Helm, Vic Irsik,
and Alfred Stoecklein, each of them an old, still-faithful
employee of the late Herbert W. Clutter. Assisting at the
disposal of his possessions was their final service, for
today was their last day at River Valley Farm; the property
had been leased to an Oklahoma rancher, and
henceforward strangers would live and work there. As the
auction progressed, and Mr. Clutter’s worldly domain
dwindled, gradually vanished, Paul Helm, remembering the
burial of the murdered family, said, “It’s like a second
funeral.”
The last thing to go was the contents of the livestock corral,
mostly horses, including Nancy’s horse, big, fat Babe, who
was much beyond her prime. It was late afternoon, school
was out, and several schoolmates of Nancy’s were among
the spectators when bidding on the horse began; Susan
Kidwell was there. Sue, who had adopted another of
Nancy’s orphaned pets, a cat, wished she could give Babe
a home, for she loved the old horse and knew how much
Nancy had loved her. The two girls had often gone riding
together aboard Babe’s wide back, jogged through the
wheat fields on hot summer evenings down to the river and
into the water, the mare wading against the current until, as
Sue once described it, “the three of us were cool as fish.”
But Sue had no place to keep a horse.
“Ihear fifty . . . sixty-five . . . seventy . . .”: the bidding was
laggardly, nobody seemed really to want Babe, and the
man who got her, a Mennonite farmer who said he might
use her for plowing, paid seventy-five dollars. As he led her
out of the corral, Sue Kidwell ran forward; she raised her
hand as though to wave goodbye, but instead clasped it
over her mouth.
The Garden City Telegram, on the eve of the trial’s start,
printed the following editorial: “Some may think the eyes of
the entire nation are on Garden City during this sensational
murder trial. But they are not. Even a hundred miles west of
here in Colorado few persons are even acquainted with the
case—other than just remembering some members of a
prominent family were slain. This is a sad commentary on
the state of crime in our nation. Since the four members of
the Clutter family were killed last fall, several other such
multiple murders have occurred in various parts of the
country. Just during the few days leading up to this trial at
least three mass murder cases broke into the headlines.
As a result, this crime and trial are just one of many such
cases people have read about and forgotten. . . .”
Although the eyes of the nation were not upon them, the
demeanor of the event’s main participants, from the court
recorder to the judge himself, was markedly self-aware on
the morning of the court’s first convening. All four of the
lawyers sported new suits; the new shoes of the big-footed
county attorney creaked and squealed with every step.
Hickock, too, was sharply dressed in clothes provided by
his parents: trim blue-serge trousers, a white shirt, a narrow
dark-blue tie. Only Perry Smith, who owned neither jacket
nor tie, seemed sartorially misplaced. Wearing an open-
necked shirt (borrowed from Mr. Meier) and blue jeans
rolled up at the cuffs, he looked as lonely and inappropriate
as a seagull in a wheat field.
The courtroom, an unpretentious chamber situated on the
third floor of the Finney County Courthouse, has dull white
walls and furnishings of darkly varnished wood. The
spectator benches can seat perhaps one hundred and sixty
persons. On Tuesday morning, March 22, the benches
were occupied exclusively by the all-male venire of Finney
County residents from which a jury was to be selected. Not
many of the summoned citizenry seemed anxious to serve
(one potential juror, in conversation with another, said,
“They can’t use me. Ican’t hear well enough.” To which his
friend, after a bit of sly reflection, replied, “Come to think of
it, my hearing’s not too good either”), and it was generally
thought that the choosing of the jury would take several
days. As it turned out, the process was completed within
four hours; moreover, the jury, including two alternative
members, was extracted from the first forty-four candidates.
Seven were rejected on pre-emptory challenge by the
defense, and three were excused at the request of the
prosecution; another twenty won dismissal either because
they opposed capital punishment or because they admitted
to having already formed a firm opinion regarding the guilt
of the defendants.
The fourteen men ultimately elected consisted of half a
dozen farmers, a pharmacist, a nursery manager, an airport
employee, a well driller, two salesmen, a machinist, and the
manager of Ray’s Bowling Alley. They were all family men
(several had five children or more), and were seriously
affiliated with one or another of the local churches. During
the voir dire examination, four of them told the court that
they had been personally, though not intimately, acquainted
with Mr. Clutter; but upon further questioning, each said he
did not feel this circumstance would hinder his ability to
reach an impartial verdict. The airport employee, a middle-
aged man named N. L. Dunnan, said, when asked his
opinion of capital punishment, “Ordinarily I’m against it. But
in this case, no”—a declaration which, to some who heard
it, seemed clearly indicative of prejudice. Dunnan was
nevertheless accepted as a juror.
The defendants were inattentive observers of the voir dire
proceedings. The previous day, Dr. Jones, the psychiatrist
who had volunteered to examine them, had interviewed
them separately for approximately two hours: at the end of
the interviews, he had suggested that they each write for
him an autobiographical statement, and it was the act of
composing these statements that occupied the accused
throughout the hours spent assembling a jury. Seated at
opposite ends of their counsels’ table, Hickock worked with
a pen and Smith with a pencil.
Smith wrote:
Iwas born Perry Edward Smith Oct. 27 1928 in
Huntington, Elko County, Nevada, which is situated way out
in the boon docks, so to speak. Irecall that in 1929 our
family had ventured to Juneau, Alaska. In my family were
my brother Tex Jr. (he later changed his name to James
because of the ridicule of the name “Tex” & also Ibelieve
he hated my father in his early years—my mother’s doing).
My sister Fern (She also changed her name—to Joy). My
sister Barbara. And myself. . . . In Juneau, my father was
making bootleg hooch. Ibelieve it was during this period
my mother became acquainted with alcohol. Mom & Dad
began having quarrels. Iremember my mother was
“entertaining” some sailors while my father was away.
When he came home a fight ensued, and my father, after a
violent struggle, threw the sailors out & proceeded to beat
my mother. Iwas frightfully scared, in fact all us children
were terrified. Crying. Iwas scared because Ithought my
father was going to hurt me, also because he was beating
my mother. Ireally didn’t understand why he was beating
her but Ifelt she must have done something dreadfully
wrong. . . . The next thing Ican vaguely recall is living in Fort
Bragg, Calif. My brother had been presented a B.B. gun.
He had shot a hummingbird, and after he had shot it he was
sorry. Iasked him to let me shoot the B.B. gun. He pushed
me away, telling me Iwas too small. It made me so mad I
started to cry. After Ifinished crying, my anger mounted
again, and during the evening when the B.B. gun was
behind the chair my brother was sitting in, Igrabbed it &
held it to my brother’s ear & hollered BANG! My father (or
mother) beat me and made me apologize. My brother used
to shoot at a big white horse riden by a neighbor who went
by our place on his way to town. The neighbor caught my
brother and Ihiding in the bushes and took us to Dad & we
got a beating & brother had his B.B. gun taken away & I
was glad he had his gun taken away! . . . This is about all I
remember when we lived in Fort Bragg (Oh! We kids used
to jump from a hay-loft, holding an umbrella, onto a pile of
hay on the ground). . . . My next recollection is several years
later when we were living in Calif.? Nevada? Irecall a very
odious episode between my mother and a Negro. We
children slept on a porch in the summertime. One of our
beds was directly under my mother and father’s room.
Everyone of us kids had taken a good look through the
partly open curtain and seen what was going on. Dad had
hired a Negro (Sam) to do odd jobs around the farm, or
ranch, while he was working somewhere down the road. He
used to come home late in the evening in his Model A truck.
Ido not recall the chain of events but assumed Dad had
known or suspected what was happening. It ended in a
seperation between Mom & Dad & Mom took us kids to
San Francisco. She run off with Dad’s truck & all of the
many souvenirs he brought from Alaska. Ibelieve this was
in 1935 (?). . . . In Frisco Iwas continously in trouble. Ihad
started to run around with a gang, all of which were older
than myself. My mother was always drunk, never in a fit
condition to properly provide and care for us. Irun as free &
wild as a coyote. There was no rule or discipline, or anyone
to show me right from wrong. Icame & went as Ipleased—
until my first encounter with Trouble. Iwas in & out of
Detention Homes many many times for running away from
home & stealing. Iremember one place Iwas sent to. Ihad
weak kidneys & wet the bed every night. This was very
humiliating to me, but Icouldn’t control myself. Iwas very
severly beaten by the cottage mistress, who had called me
names and made fun of me in front of all the boys. She
used to come around at all hours of the night to see if Iwet
the bed. She would throw back the covers & furiously beat
me with a large black leather belt—pull me out of bed by my
hair & drag me to the bathroom & throw me in the tub & turn
the cold water on & tell me to wash myself and the sheets.
Every night was a nightmare. Later on she thought it was
very funny to put some kind of ointment on my penis. This
was almost unbearable. It burned something terrible. She
was later discharged from her job. But this never changed
my mind about her & what Iwished Icould have done to her
& all the people who made fun of me.
Then, because Dr. Jones had told him he must have the
statement that very afternoon, Smith skipped forward to
early adolescence and the years he and his father had lived
together, the two of them wandering all over the West and
Far West, prospecting, trapping, doing odd jobs:
Iloved my father but there were times when this love and
affection Ihad for him drained from my heart like wasted
water. Whenever he would not try to understand my
problems. Give me a little consideration & voice &
responsibility. Ihad to get away from him. When Iwas
sixteen Ijoined the Merchant Marine. In 1948 Ijoined the
army—the recruiting officer gave me a break and upped
my test. From this time on Istarted to realize the
importance of an education. This only added to the hatred
and bitterness Iheld for others. Ibegan to get into fights. I
threw a Japanese policeman off a bridge into the water. I
was court-martialed for demolishing a Japanese cafe. I
was court-martialed again in Kyoto, Japan, for stealing a
Japanese taxicab. Iwas in the army almost four years. Ihad
many violent outbursts of anger while Iserved time in Japan
& Korea. Iwas in Korea 15 months, was rotated and sent
back to the states—and was given special recognition as
being the first Korean Vet to come back to the territory of
Alaska. Big write up, picture in paper, paid trip to Alaska by
air, all the trimmings. . . . Ifinished my army service in Ft.
Lewis, Washington.
Smith’s pencil sped almost indecipherably as he hurried
toward more recent history: the motorcycle accident that
had crippled him, the burglary in Phillipsburg, Kansas, that
had led to his first prison sentence:
. . . Iwas sentenced to 5 to 10 years for grand larceny,
burglary and jailbreak. Ifelt Iwas very unjustly dealt with. I
became very bitter while Iwas in prison. Upon my release I
was supposed to go to Alaska with my father—Ididn’t go—
Iworked for a while in Nevada and Idaho-went to Las
Vegas and continued to Kansas where got into the
situation I’m in now. No time for more.
He signed his name, and added a postscript:
“Would like to speak to you again. There’s much Ihaven’t
said that may interest you. Ihave always felt a remarkable
exhiliration being among people with a purpose and sense
of dedication to carry out that purpose. Ifelt this about you
in your presence.”
Hickock did not write with his companion’s intensity. He
often stopped to listen to the questioning of a prospective
juror, or to stare at the faces around him—particularly, and
with plain displeasure, the muscular face of the county
attorney, Duane West, who was his own age, twenty-eight.
But his statement, written in a stylized script that looked like
slanting rain, was finished before the court adjourned for
the day:
Iwill try to tell you all Ican about myself, though most of
my early life is vague to me—up until about my tenth
birthday. My school years went quite the same as most
other boys my own age. Ihad my share of fights, girls, and
other things that go with a growing boy. My home life was
also normal, but as Itold you before, Iwas hardly ever
allowed to leave my yard and visit with playmates. My father
was always strict about us boys [his brother and him] in that
line. Also Ihad to help my dad quite a lot around the
house. . . . Ican only remember my mother and dad having
one argument that amounted to anything. What it was
about, Idon’t know. . . . My dad bought me a bicycle once,
and Ibelieve that Iwas the proudest boy in town. It was a
girl’s bike and he changed it over to a boy’s. He painted it
all up and it looked like new. But Ihad a lot of toys when I
was little, a lot for the financial condition that my folks were
in. We were always what you would call semi-poor. Never
down and out, but several times on the verge of it. My dad
was a hard worker and did his best to provide for us. My
mother also was always a hard worker. Her house was
always neat, and we had clean clothes aplenty. Iremember
my dad used to wear those old fashioned flat crown caps,
and he would make me wear them too, and Ididn’t like
them. . . . In high-school Idid real well, made above
average grades the first year or two. But then started falling
off a little. Ihad a girl friend. She was a nice girl, and Inever
once tried to touch her anyway but just kissing. It was a real
clean courtship. . . . While in school Iparticipated in all the
sports, and received 9 letters in all. Basketball, football,
track and baseball. My senior year was best. Inever had
any steady girl, just played the field. That was when Ihad
my first relationship with a girl. Of course Itold the boys that
I’d had a lot of girls. . . . Igot offers from two colleges to play
ball, but never attended any of them. After Igraduated from
school Iwent to work for the Santa Fe railroad, and stayed
until the following winter when Igot laid off. The following
spring Igot a job with the Roark Motor Company. Ihad
been working there about four months when Ihad an
automobile wreck with a company car. Iwas in the hospital
several days with extensive head injuries. While Iwas in the
condition Iwas in Icouldn’t find another job, so Iwas
unemployed most of the winter. Meantime, Ihad met a girl
and fallen in love. Her dad was a Baptist preacher and
resented me going with her. In July we were married. All hell
broke loose from her dad until he learned she was
pregnant. But still he never wished me good luck and that
has always gone against the grain. After we were married, I
worked at a service-station near Kansas City. Iworked
from 8 at night till 8 in the morning. Sometimes my wife
stayed with me all night—she was afraid Icouldn’t keep
awake, so she came to help me. Then Igot an offer to work
at Perry Pontiac, which Igladly accepted. It was very
satisfactory, though Ididn’t make a lot of money—$75 a
week. Igot along good with the other men, and was well
liked by my boss. Iworked there five years. . . . During my
employment there was the beginning of some of the lowest
things Ihave ever done.
Here Hickock revealed his pedophiliac tendencies, and
after describing several sample experiences, wrote:
Iknow it is wrong. But at the time Inever give any thought
to whether it is right or wrong. The same with stealing. It
seems to be an impulse. One thing Inever told you about
the Clutter deal is this. Before Iever went to their house I
knew there would be a girl there. Ithink the main reason I
went there was not to rob them but to rape the girl. Because
Ithought a lot about it. That is one reason why Inever
wanted to turn back when we started to. Even when Isaw
there was no safe. Idid make some advances toward the
Clutter girl when Iwas there. But Perry never gave me a
chance. Ihope no one finds this out but you, as Ihaven’t
even told my lawyer. There were other things Ishould have
told you, but I’m afraid of my people finding them out.
Because Iam more ashamed of them (these things Idid)
than hanging. . . . Ihave had sickness. Ithink caused from
the car wreck Ihad. Spells of passing out, and sometimes I
would hemhorrage at the nose and left ear. Ihad one at
some people’s house by the name of Crist—they live south
of my parents. Not long ago Ihad a piece of glass work out
of my head. It came out the corner of my eye. My dad
helped me to get it out. . . . Ifigure Ishould tell you the things
that led to my divorce, and things that caused me to go to
prison. It started the early part of 1957. My wife and Iwere
living in an apartment in Kansas City. Ihad quit my job at
the automobile company, and went into the garage
business for myself. Iwas renting the garage from a woman
who had a daughter-in-law named Margaret. Imet this girl
one day while Iwas at work, and we went to have a cup of
coffee. Her husband was away in the Marine Corps. To
make a long story short, Istarted going out with her. My wife
sued for divorce. Ibegan thinking Inever really loved my
wife. Because if Ihad, Iwouldn’t have done all the things I’d
done. So Inever fought the divorce. Istarted drinking, and
was drunk for almost a month. Ineglected my business,
spent more money than Iearned, wrote bad checks, and in
the end became a thief. For this last Iwas sent to the
penitentiary. . . . My lawyer said Ishould be truthful with you
as you can help me. And Ineed help, as you know.
The next day, Wednesday, was the proper start of the trial;
it was also the first time ordinary spectators were admitted
into the courtroom, an area too small to accommodate
more than a modest percentage of those who applied at
the door. The best seats had been reserved for twenty
members of the press, and for such special personages as
Hickock’s parents and Donald Cullivan (who, at the request
of Perry Smith’s lawyer, had traveled from Massachusetts
to appear as a character witness in behalf of his former
Army friend). It had been rumored that the two surviving
Clutter daughters would be present; they were not, nor did
they attend any subsequent session. The family was
represented by Mr. Clutter’s younger brother, Arthur, who
had driven a hundred miles to be there. He told newsmen: “I
just want to get a good look at them [Smith and Hickock]. I
just want to see what kind of animals they are. The way I
feel, Icould tear them apart.” He took a seat directly behind
the defendants, and fixed them with a gaze of unique
persistence, as though he planned to paint their portraits
from memory. Presently, and it was as if Arthur Clutter had
willed him to do it, Perry Smith turned and looked at him—
and recognized a face very like the face of the man he had
killed: the same mild eyes, narrow lips, firm chin. Perry, who
was chewing gum, stopped chewing; he lowered his eyes,
a minute elapsed, then slowly his jaws began to move
again. Except for this moment, Smith, and Hickock too,
affected a courtroom attitude that was simultaneously
uninterested and disinterested; they chewed gum and
tapped their feet with languid impatience as the state
summoned its first witness.
Nancy Ewalt. And after Nancy, Susan Kidwell. The young
girls described what they saw upon entering the Clutter
house on Sunday, November 15: the quiet rooms, an empty
purse on a kitchen floor, sunshine in a bedroom, and their
schoolmate, Nancy Clutter, surrounded by her own blood.
The defense waived cross-examination, a policy they
pursued with the next three witnesses (Nancy Ewalt’s
father, Clarence, and Sheriff Earl Robinson, and the county
coroner, Dr. Robert Fenton), each of whom added to the
narrative of events that sunny November morning: the
discovery, finally, of all four victims, and accounts of how
they looked, and, from Dr. Fenton, a clinical diagnosis of
why—“Severe traumas to brain and vital cranial structures
inflicted by a shotgun.”
Then Richard G. Rohleder took the stand.
Rohleder is Chief Investigator of the Garden City Police
Department. His hobby is photography, and he is good at
it. It was Rohleder who took the pictures that, when
developed, revealed Hickock’s dusty footprints in the
Clutter cellar, prints the camera could discern, though not
the human eye. And it was he who had photographed the
corpses, those death-scene images Alvin Dewey had
continuously pondered while the murders were still
unsolved. The point of Rohleder’s testimony was to
establish the fact of his having made these pictures, which
the prosecution proposed to put into evidence. But
Hickock’s attorney objected: “The sole reason the pictures
are being introduced is to prejudice and inflame the minds
of the jurors.” Judge Tate overruled the objection and
allowed the photographs into evidence, which meant they
must be shown to the jury.
While this was being done, Hickock’s father, addressing a
journalist seated near him, said, “The judge up there! I
never seen a man so prejudiced. Just no sense having a
trial. Not with him in charge. Why, that man was a
pallbearer at the funeral!” (Actually, Tate was but slightly
acquainted with the victims, and was not present at their
funeral in any capacity.) But Mr. Hickock’s was the only
voice raised in an exceedingly silent courtroom. Altogether,
there were seventeen prints, and as they were passed from
hand to hand, the jurors’ expressions reflected the impact
the pictures made: one man’s cheeks reddened, as if he
had been slapped, and a few, after the first distressing
glance, obviously had no heart for the task; it was as though
the photographs had prised open their mind’s eye, and
forced them to at last really see the true and pitiful thing that
had happened to a neighbor and his wife and children. It
amazed them, it made them angry, and several of them—
the pharmacist, the manager of the bowling alley—stared at
the defendants with total contempt.
The elder Mr. Hickock, wearily wagging his head, again
and again murmured, “No sense. Just no sense having a
trial.”
As the day’s final witness, the prosecution had promised to
produce a “mystery man.” It was the man who had supplied
the information that led to the arrest of the accused: Floyd
Wells, Hickock’s former cellmate. Because he was still
serving a sentence at Kansas State Penitentiary, and
therefore was in danger of retaliation from other inmates,
Wells had never been publicly identified as the informer.
Now, in order that he might safely testify at the trial, he had
been removed from the prison and lodged in a small jail in
an adjacent county. Nevertheless, Wells’ passage across
the courtroom toward the witness stand was oddly stealthy
—as though he expected to encounter an assassin along
the way—and, as he walked past Hickock, Hickock’s lips
writhed as he whispered a few atrocious words. Wells
pretended not to notice; but like a horse that has heard the
hum of a rattlesnake, he shied away from the betrayed
man’s venomous vicinity. Taking the stand, he stared
straight ahead, a somewhat chinless little farmboyish fellow
wearing a very decent dark-blue suit which the State of
Kansas had bought for the occasion—the state being
concerned that its most important witness should look
respectable, and consequently trustworthy.
Wells’ testimony, perfected by pre-trial rehearsal, was as
tidy as his appearance. Encouraged by the sympathetic
promptings of Logan Green, the witness acknowledged
that he had once, for approximately a year, worked as a
hired hand at River Valley Farm; he went on to say that
some ten years later, following his conviction on a burglary
charge, he had become friendly with another imprisoned
burglar, Richard Hickock, and had described to him the
Clutter farm and family.
“Now,” Green asked, “during your conversations with Mr.
Hickock what was said about Mr. Clutter by either of you?”
“Well, we talked quite a bit about Mr. Clutter. Hickock said
he was about to be paroled, and he was going to go West
looking for a job; he might stop to see Mr. Clutter to get a
job. Iwas telling him how wealthy Mr. Clutter was.”
“Did that seem to interest Mr. Hickock?”
“Well, he wanted to know if Mr. Clutter had a safe around
there.”
“Mr. Wells, did you think at the time there was a safe in the
Clutter house?”
“Well, it has been so long since Iworked out there. Ithought
there was a safe. Iknew there was a cabinet of some
kind. . . . The next thing Iknew he [Hickock] was talking
about robbing Mr. Clutter.”
“Did he tell you anything about how he was going to commit
the robbery?”
“He told me if he done anything like that he wouldn’t leave
no witnesses.”
“Did he actually say what he was going to do with the
witnesses?”
“Yes. He told me he would probably tie them up and then
rob them and then kill them.”
Having established premeditation of great degree, Green
left the witness to the ministrations of the defense. Old Mr.
Fleming, a classic country lawyer more happily at home
with land deeds than ill deeds, opened the cross-
examination. The intent of his queries, as he soon
established, was to introduce a subject the prosecution had
emphatically avoided: the question of Wells’ own role in the
murder plot, and his own moral liability.
“You didn’t,” Fleming said, hastening to the heart of the
matter, “say anything at all to Mr. Hickock to discourage
him from coming out here to rob and kill the Clutter family?”
“No. Anybody tells you anything about that up there [Kansas
State Penitentiary], you don’t pay any attention to it
because you think they are just talking anyway.”
“You mean you talked that way and didn’t mean anything?
Didn’t you mean to convey to him [Hickock] the idea that
Mr. Clutter had a safe? You wanted Mr. Hickock to believe
that, did you not?”
In his quiet way, Fleming was giving the witness a rough
time; Wells plucked at his tie, as though the knot was
suddenly too tight.
“And you meant for Mr. Hickock to believe that Mr. Clutter
had a lot of money, didn’t you?”
“Itold him Mr. Clutter had a lot of money, yes.”
Fleming once more elicited an account of how Hickock had
fully informed Wells of his violent plans for the Clutter family.
Then, as though veiled in a private grief, the lawyer wistfully
said, “And even after all of that you did nothing to
discourage him?”
“Ididn’t believe he’d do it.”
“You didn’t believe him. Then why, when you heard about
the thing that happened out here, why did you think he was
the one that was guilty?”
Wells cockily replied, “Because it was done just like he
said he was going to do!”
Harrison Smith, the younger half of the defense team, took
charge. Assuming an aggressive, sneering manner that
seemed forced, for really he is a mild and lenient man,
Smith asked the witness if he had a nickname.
“No. Ijust go by ‘Floyd.’ ”
The lawyer snorted. “Don’t they call you ‘Squealer’ now? Or
do they call you ‘Snitch’?”
“Ijust go by ‘Floyd,’ ” Wells repeated, rather hangdog.
“How many times have you been in jail?”
“About three times.”
“Some of those times for lying, were they?”
Denying it, the witness said that once he’d gone to jail for
driving without an operator’s license, that burglary was the
reason for his second incarceration, and the third, a ninety-
day hitch in an Army stockade, had been the outcome of
something that happened while he was a soldier: “We was
on a train trip guard. We got a little intoxicated on the train,
done a little extra shooting at some windows and lights.”
Everyone laughed; everyone except the defendants
(Hickock spat on the floor) and Harrison Smith, who now
asked Wells why, after learning of the Holcomb tragedy, he
had tarried several weeks before telling the authorities what
he knew. “Weren’t you,” he said, “waiting for something to
come out? Maybe like a reward?”
“No.”
“You didn’t hear anything about a reward?” The lawyer was
referring to the reward of one thousand dollars that had
been offered by the Hutchinson News, for information
resulting in the arrest and conviction of the Clutter
murderers.
“Iseen it in the paper.”
“That was before you went to the authorities, wasn’t it?” And
when the witness admitted that this was true, Smith
triumphantly continued by asking, “What kind of immunity
did the county attorney offer you for coming up here today
and testifying?”
But Logan Green protested: “We object to the form of the
question, Your Honor. There’s been no testimony about
immunity to anybody.” The objection was sustained, and the
witness dismissed; as he left the stand, Hickock
announced to everyone within earshot, “Sonofabitch.
Anybody ought to hang, he ought to hang. Look at him.
Gonna walk out of here and get that money and go scot-
free.”
This prediction proved correct, for not long afterward Wells
collected both the reward and a parole. But his good
fortune was short-lived. He was soon in trouble again, and,
over the years, has experienced many vicissitudes. At
present he is a resident of the Mississippi State Prison in
Parchman, Mississippi, where he is serving a thirty-year
sentence for armed robbery.
By Friday, when the court recessed for the weekend, the
state had completed its case, which included the
appearance of four Special Agents of the Federal Bureau
of Investigation in Washington, D.C. These men, laboratory
technicians skilled in various categories of scientific crime
detection, had studied the physical evidence connecting
the accused to the murders (blood samples, footprints,
cartridge shells, rope and tape), and each of them certified
the validity of the exhibits. Finally, the four K.B.I. agents
provided accounts of interviews with the prisoners, and of
the confessions eventually made by them. In cross-
examining the K.B.I. personnel, the defense attorneys, a
beleaguered pair, argued that the admissions of guilt had
been obtained by improper means—brutal interrogation in
sweltering, brightly lighted, closet-like rooms. The
allegation, which was untrue, irritated the detectives into
expounding very convincing denials. (Later, in reply to a
reporter who asked him why he had dogged this artificial
scent at such length, Hickock’s lawyer snapped, “What am I
supposed to do? Hell, I’m playing without any cards. But I
can’t just sit here like a dummy. I’ve got to sound off once in
a while.”)
The prosecution’s most damaging witness proved to be
Alvin Dewey; his testimony, the first public rendering of the
events detailed in Perry Smith’s confession, earned large
headlines (UNVEIL MUTE MURDER HORROR—Cold, Chilling
Facts Told), and shocked his listeners—none more so than
Richard Hickock, who came to a startled and chagrined
attention when, in the course of Dewey’s commentary, the
agent said, “There is one incident Smith related to me that I
haven’t as yet mentioned. And that was that after the Clutter
family was tied up, Hickock said to him how well built he
thought Nancy Clutter was, and that he was going to rape
her. Smith said he told Hickock there wasn’t going to be
anything like that go on. Smith told me he had no respect
for anyone who couldn’t control their sexual desires, and
that he would have fought Hickock before allowing him to
rape the Clutter girl.” Heretofore, Hickock had not known
that his partner had informed police of the proposed
assault; nor was he aware that, in a friendlier spirit, Perry
had altered his original story to claim that he alone had shot
the four victims—a fact revealed by Dewey as he neared
the end of his testimony: “Perry Smith told me he wished to
change two things in the statement he had given us. He
said everything else in that statement was true and correct.
Except these two things. And that was that he wanted to
say he killed Mrs. Clutter and Nancy Clutter—not Hickock.
He told me that Hickock. . . didn’t want to die with his
mother thinking he had killed any members of the Clutter
family. And he said the Hickocks were good people. So
why not have it that way.”
Hearing this, Mrs. Hickock wept. Throughout the trial she
had sat quietly beside her husband, her hands worrying a
rumpled handkerchief. As often as she could she caught
her son’s eye, nodded at him and simulated a smile which,
though flimsily constructed, affirmed her loyalty. But clearly
the woman’s control was exhausted; she began to cry. A
few spectators glanced at her, and glanced away,
embarrassed; the rest seemed oblivious of the raw dirge
counterpointing Dewey’s continuing recitation; even her
husband, perhaps because he believed it unmanly to take
notice, remained aloof. At last a woman reporter, the only
one present, led Mrs. Hickock out of the courtroom and into
the privacy of a ladies’ room.
Once her anguish had subsided, Mrs. Hickock expressed a
need to confide. “There’s nobody much Ican talk to,” she
told her companion. “Idon’t mean people haven’t been
kind, neighbors and all. And strangers, too—strangers have
wrote letters to say they know how hard it must be and how
sorry they are. Nobody’s said a mean word, either to Walter
or me. Not even here, where you might expect it. Everybody
here has gone out of their way to be friendly. The waitress
over at the place where we take our meals, she puts ice
cream on the pie and don’t charge for it. Itell her don’t, I
can’t eat it. Used to be Icould eat anything didn’t eat me
first. But she puts it on. To be nice. Sheila, that’s her, she
says it’s not our fault what happened. But it seems to me
like people are looking at me and thinking, Well, she must
be to blame somehow. The way Iraised Dick. Maybe Idid
do something wrong. Only Idon’t know what it could have
been; Iget headaches trying to remember. We’re plain
people, just country people, getting along the same as
everybody else. We had some good times at our house. I
taught Dick the foxtrot. Dancing, Iwas always crazy about it,
it was my whole life when Iwas a girl; and there was a boy,
gosh, he could dance like Christmas—we won a silver cup
waltzing together. For a long time we planned to run away
and go on the stage. Vaudeville. It was just a dream.
Children dreaming. He left town, and one day Imarried
Walter, and Walter Hickock couldn’t do step one. He said if
Iwanted a hoofer Ishould’ve married a horse. Nobody ever
danced with me again until Ilearned Dick, and he didn’t
take to it exactly, but he was sweet, Dick was the best-
natured little kid.”
Mrs. Hickock removed the spectacles she was wearing,
polished the smeared lenses and resettled them on her
pudgy, agreeable face. “There’s lots more to Dick than
what you hear back there in the courtroom. The lawyers
jabbering how terrible he is—no good at all. Ican’t make
any excuses for what he did, his part in it. I’m not forgetting
that family; Ipray for them every night. But Ipray for Dick,
too. And this boy Perry. It was wrong of me to hate him; I’ve
got nothing but pity for him now. And you know—Ibelieve
Mrs. Clutter would feel pity, too. Being the kind of woman
they say she was.”
Court had adjourned; the noises of the departing audience
clattered in the corridor beyond the lavatory door. Mrs.
Hickock said she must go and meet her husband. “He’s
dying. Idon’t think he minds any more.”
Many observers of the trial scene were baffled by the
visitor from Boston, Donald Cullivan. They could not quite
understand why this staid young Catholic, a successful
engineer who had taken his degree at Harvard, a husband
and the father of three children, should choose to befriend
an uneducated, homicidal half-breed whom he knew but
slightly and had not seen for nine years. Cullivan himself
said, “My wife doesn’t understand it either. Coming out
here was something Icouldn’t afford to do-it meant using a
week of my vacation, and money we really need for other
things. On the other hand, it was something Icouldn’t afford
not to do. Perry’s lawyer wrote me asking if Iwould be a
character witness; the moment Iread the letter Iknew Ihad
to do it. Because I’d offered this man my friendship. And
because—well, Ibelieve in the life everlasting. All souls can
be saved for God.”
The salvation of a soul, namely Perry Smith’s, was an
enterprise the deeply Catholic undersheriff and his wife
were eager to assist—although Mrs. Meier had been
rebuffed by Perry when she had suggested a consultation
with Father Goubeaux, a local priest. (Perry said, “Priests
and nuns have had their chance with me. I’m still wearing
the scars to prove it.”) And so, during the weekend recess,
the Meiers invited Cullivan to eat Sunday dinner with the
prisoner in his cell.
The opportunity to entertain his friend, play host as it were,
delighted Perry, and the planning of the menu—wild goose,
stuffed and roasted, with gravy and creamed potatoes and
string beans, aspic salad, hot biscuits, cold milk, freshly
baked cherry tarts, cheese, and coffee—seemed to
concern him more than the outcome of the trial (which, to be
sure, he did not consider a suspenseful matter: “Those
prairiebillys, they’ll vote to hang fast as pigs eat slop. Look
at their eyes. I’ll be damned if I’m the only killer in the
courtroom”). All Sunday morning he prepared to receive his
guest. The day was warm, a little windy, and leaf shadows,
supple emanations from the tree boughs that brushed the
cell’s barred window, tantalized Perry’s tamed squirrel. Big
Red chased the swaying patterns while his master swept
and dusted, scrubbed the floor and scoured the toilet and
cleared the desk of literary accumulations. The desk was to
be the dining table, and once Perry had finished setting it, it
looked most inviting, for Mrs. Meier had donated a linen
tablecloth, starched napkins, and her best china and silver.
Cullivan was impressed—he whistled when the feast,
arriving on trays, was placed upon the table-and before
sitting down, he asked the host if he might offer a blessing.
The host, head unbowed, cracked his knuckles as Cullivan,
with bowed head and palms together, intoned, “Bless us, O
Lord, and these thy gifts which we are about to receive from
thy bounty, through the mercy of Christ, our Lord. Amen.”
Perry murmuringly remarked that in his opinion any credit
due belonged to Mrs. Meier. “She did all the work. Well,” he
said, heaping his guest’s plate, “it’s good to see you, Don.
You look just the same. Haven’t changed a bit.”
Cullivan, in appearance a cautious bank clerk with depleted
hair and a face rather difficult to recall, agreed that
outwardly he hadn’t changed much. But his interior self, the
invisible man, was another matter: “Iwas coasting along.
Not knowing God is the only reality. Once you realize that,
then everything falls into place. Life has meaning—and so
does death. Boy, do you always eat like this?”
Perry laughed. “She’s really a terrific cook, Mrs. Meier. You
ought to taste her Spanish rice. I’ve gained fifteen pounds
since Igot here. Course Iwas on the thin side. I’d lost a lot
of weight while Dick and me were out on the road riding all
to hell and gone—hardly ever eating a square meal, hungry
as hell most of the time. Mostly, we lived like animals. Dick
was always stealing canned stuff out of grocery stores.
Baked beans and canned spaghetti. We’d open it up in the
car and gobble it cold. Animals. Dick loves to steal. It’s an
emotional thing with him—a sickness. I’m a thief too, but
only if Idon’t have the money to pay. Dick, if he was
carrying a hundred dollars in his pocket, he’d steal a stick
of chewing gum.”
Later, over cigarettes and coffee, Perry returned to the
subject of thievery. “My friend Willie-Jay used to talk about
it. He used to say that all crimes were only ‘varieties of
theft.’ Murder included. When you kill a man you steal his
life. Iguess that makes me a pretty big thief. See, Don—I
did kill them. Down there in court, old Dewey made it sound
like Iwas prevaricating—on account of Dick’s mother. Well,
Iwasn’t. Dick helped me, he held the flashlight and picked
up the shells. And it was his idea, too. But Dick didn’t shoot
them, he never could’ve—though he’s damn quick when it
comes to running down an old dog. Iwonder why Idid it.”
He scowled, as though the problem was new to him, a
newly unearthed stone of surprising, unclassified color. “I
don’t know why,” he said, as if holding it to the light, and
angling it now here, now there. “Iwas sore at Dick. The
tough brass boy. But it wasn’t Dick. Or the fear of being
identified. Iwas willing to take that gamble. And it wasn’t
because of anything the Clutters did. They never hurt me.
Like other people. Like people have all my life. Maybe it’s
just that the Clutters were the ones who had to pay for it.”
Cullivan probed, trying to gauge the depth of what he
assumed would be Perry’s contrition. Surely he must be
experiencing a remorse sufficiently profound to summon a
desire for God’s mercy and forgiveness? Perry said, “Am I
sorry? If that’s what you mean—I’m not. Idon’t feel anything
about it. Iwish Idid. But nothing about it bothers me a bit.
Half an hour after it happened, Dick was making jokes and I
was laughing at them. Maybe we’re not human. I’m human
enough to feel sorry for myself. Sorry Ican’t walk out of here
when you walk out. But that’s all.” Cullivan could scarcely
credit so detached an attitude; Perry was confused,
mistaken, it was not possible for any man to be that devoid
of conscience or compassion. Perry said, “Why? Soldiers
don’t lose much sleep. They murder, and get medals for
doing it. The good people of Kansas want to murder me—
and some hangman will be glad to get the work. It’s easy to
kill—a lot easier than passing a bad check. Just remember:
Ionly knew the Clutters maybe an hour. If I’d really known
them, Iguess I’d feel different. Idon’t think Icould live with
myself. But the way it was, it was like picking off targets in a
shooting gallery.”
Cullivan was silent, and his silence upset Perry, who
seemed to interpret it as implying disapproval. “Hell, Don,
don’t make me act the hypocrite with you. Throw a load of
bull—how sorry Iam, how all Iwant to do now is crawl on my
knees and pray. That stuff don’t ring with me. Ican’t accept
overnight what I’ve always denied. The truth is, you’ve done
more for me than any what you call God ever has. Or ever
will. By writing to me, by signing yourself ‘friend.’ When I
had no friends. Except Joe James.” Joe James, he
explained to Cullivan, was a young Indian logger with whom
he had once lived in a forest near Bellingham, Washington.
“That’s a long way from Garden City. A good two thousand
miles. Isent word to Joe about the trouble I’m in. Joe’s a
poor guy, he’s got seven kids to feed, but he promised to
come here if he had to walk. He hasn’t shown up yet, and
maybe he won’t, only Ithink he will. Joe always liked me.
Do you, Don?”
“Yes. Ilike you.”
Cullivan’s softly emphatic answer pleased and rather
flustered Perry. He smiled and said, “Then you must be
some kind of nut.” Suddenly rising, he crossed the cell and
picked up a broom. “Idon’t know why Ishould die among
strangers. Let a bunch of prairiebillys stand around and
watch me strangle. Shit. Iought to kill myself first.” He lifted
the broom and pressed the bristles against the light bulb
that burned in the ceiling. “Just unscrew the bulb and smash
it and cut my wrists. That’s what Iought to do. While you’re
still here. Somebody who cares about me a little bit.”
The trial resumed on Monday morning at ten o’clock.
Ninety minutes later the court adjourned, the case for the
defense having been completed in that brief time. The
defendants declined to testify in their own behalf, and
therefore the question of whether Hickock or Smith had
been the actual executioner of the Clutter family did not
arise.
Of the five witnesses who did appear, the first was the
hollow-eyed Mr. Hickock. Though he spoke with a dignified
and mournful clarity, he had but one contribution to make
that was relevant to a claim of temporary insanity. His son,
he said, had suffered head injuries in a car accident in July,
1950. Prior to the accident, Dick had been a “happy-go-
lucky boy,” had done well in school, been popular with his
classmates and considerate of his parents— “No trouble to
anybody.”
Harrison Smith, gently guiding the witness, said, “Iwill ask
you if, after July, 1950, you observed any change in the
personality and habits and actions of your son, Richard?”
“He just didn’t act like the same boy.”
“What were the changes you observed?”
Mr. Hickock, between pensive hesitations, listed several:
Dick was sulky and restless, he ran around with older men,
drank and gambled. “He just wasn’t the same boy.”
The last assertion was promptly challenged by Logan
Green, who undertook the cross-examination. “Mr. Hickock,
you say you never had any trouble with your son until after
1950?”
“. . . Ithink he got arrested in 1949.”
A citric smile bent Green’s tiny lips. “Remember what he
was arrested for?”
“He was accused of breaking into a drugstore.”
“Accused? Didn’t he admit that he broke into the store?”
“That’s right, he did.”
“And that was in 1949. Yet now you tell us your son had a
change in his attitude and conduct after 1950?”
“Iwould say so, yes.”
“You mean that after 1950 he became a good boy?”
Hard coughs agitated the old man; he spat into a
handkerchief. “No,” he said, studying the discharge. “I
wouldn’t say that.”
“Then what was the change that took place?”
“Well, that would be pretty hard to explain. He just didn’t act
like the same boy.”
“You mean he lost his criminal tendencies?”
The lawyer’s sally induced guffaws, a courtroom flare-up
that Judge Tate’s dour gaze soon extinguished. Mr.
Hickock, presently set free, was replaced on the stand by
Dr. W. Mitchell Jones.
Dr. Jones identified himself to the court as a “physician
specializing in the field of psychiatry,” and in support of his
qualifications, added that he had attended perhaps fifteen
hundred patients since 1956, the year he had entered a
psychiatric residency at Topeka State Hospital in Topeka,
Kansas. For the past two years he had served on the staff
of Larned State Hospital, where he was in charge of the
Dillon Building, a section reserved for the criminally insane.
Harrison Smith asked the witness, “Approximately how
many murderers have you dealt with?”
“About twenty-five.”
“Doctor, Iwould like to ask you if you know my client,
Richard Eugene Hickock?”
“Ido.”
“Have you had occasion to examine him professionally?”
“Yes, sir . . . Imade a psychiatric evaluation of Mr. Hickock.”
“Based upon your examination, do you have an opinion as
to whether or not Richard Eugene Hickock knew right from
wrong at the time of the commission of the crime?”
The witness, a stout man of twenty-eight with a moon-
shaped but intelligent, subtly delicate face, took a deep
breath, as though to equip himself for a prolonged reply—
which the judge then cautioned him he must not make: “You
may answer the question yes or no, Doctor. Limit your
answer to yes or no.”
“Yes.”
“And what is your opinion?”
“Ithink that within the usual definitions Mr. Hickock did know
right from wrong.”
Confined as he was by the M’Naghten Rule (“the usual
definitions”), a formula quite color-blind to any gradations
between black and white, Dr. Jones was impotent to
answer otherwise. But of course the response was a
letdown for Hickock’s attorney, who hopelessly asked, “Can
you qualify that answer?”
It was hopeless because though Dr. Jones agreed to
elaborate, the prosecution was entitled to object—and did,
citing the fact that Kansas law allowed nothing more than a
yes or no reply to the pertinent question. The objection was
upheld, and the witness dismissed. However, had Dr.
Jones been allowed to speak further, here is what he would
have testified: “Richard Hickock is above average in
intelligence, grasps new ideas easily and has a wide fund
of information. He is alert to what is happening around him,
and he shows no sign of mental confusion or disorientation.
His thinking is well organized and logical and he seems to
be in good contact with reality. Although Idid not find the
usual signs of organic brain damage—memory loss,
concrete concept formation, intellectual deterioration—this
cannot be completely ruled out. He had a serious head
injury with concussion and several hours of
unconsciousness in 1950—this was verified by me by
checking hospital records. He says he has had blackout
spells, periods of amnesia, and headaches ever since that
time, and a major portion of his antisocial behavior has
occurred since that time. He has never had the medical
tests which would definitely prove or disprove the existence
of residual brain damage. Definitive medical tests are
indicated before a complete evaluation can be said to
exist. . . . Hickock does show signs of emotional
abnormality. That he knew what he was doing and still went
ahead with it is possibly the most clear-cut demonstration
of this fact. He is a person who is impulsive in action, likely
to do things without thought of consequences or future
discomfort to himself or to others. He does not seem to be
capable of learning from experience, and he shows an
unusual pattern of intermittent periods of productive activity
followed by patently irresponsible actions. He cannot
tolerate feelings of frustration as a more normal person
can, and he is poorly able to rid himself of those feelings
except through antisocial activity. . . . His self-esteem is
very low, and he secretly feels inferior to others and sexually
inadequate. These feelings seem to be over-compensated
for by dreams of being rich and powerful, a tendency to
brag about his exploits, spending sprees when he has
money, and dissatisfaction with only the normal slow
advancement he could expect from his job. . . . He is
uncomfortable in his relationships to other people, and has
a pathological inability to form and hold enduring personal
attachments. Although he professes usual moral standards
he seems obviously uninfluenced by them in his actions. In
summary, he shows fairly typical characteristics of what
would psychiatrically be called a severe character disorder.
It is important that steps be taken to rule out the possibility
of organic brain damage, since, if present, it might have
substantially influenced his behavior during the past several
years and at the time of the crime.”
Aside from a formal plea to the jury, which would not take
place until the morrow, the psychiatrist’s testimony
terminated Hickock’s planned defense. Next it was the turn
of Arthur Fleming, Smith’s elderly counselor. He presented
four witnesses: the Reverend James E. Post, the
Protestant chaplain at Kansas State Penitentiary; Perry’s
Indian friend, Joe James, who after all had arrived by bus
that morning, having traveled a day and two nights from his
wilderness home in the Far Northwest; Donald Cullivan;
and, once again, Dr. Jones. Except for the latter, these men
were offered as “character witnesses”—persons expected
to attribute to the accused a few human virtues. They did
not fare very well, though each of them negotiated some
skimpily favorable remark before the protesting
prosecution, which contended that personal comments of
this nature were “incompetent, irrelevant, immaterial,”
hushed and banished them.
For example, Joe James, dark-haired, even darker-
skinned than Perry, a lithe figure who with his faded
huntsman’s shirt and moccasined feet looked as though he
had that instant mysteriously emerged from woodland
shadows, told the court that the defendant had lived with
him off and on for over two years. “Perry was a likable kid,
well liked around the neighborhood—he never done one
thing out of the way to my knowledge.” The state stopped
him there; and stopped Cullivan, too, when he said, “During
the time Iknew him in the Army, Perry was a very likable
fellow.”
The Reverend Post survived somewhat longer, for he made
no direct attempt to compliment the prisoner, but described
sympathetically an encounter with him at Lansing. “Ifirst
met Perry Smith when he came to my office in the prison
chapel with a picture he had painted—a head-and-
shoulders portrait of Jesus Christ done in pastel crayon. He
wanted to give it to me for use in the chapel. It’s been
hanging on the walls of my office ever since.”
Fleming said, “Do you have a photograph of that painting?”
The minister had an envelope full; but when he produced
them, ostensibly for distribution among the jurors, an
exasperated Logan Green leaped to his feet: “If Your Honor
please, this is going too far . . .” His Honor saw that it went
no further.
Dr. Jones was now recalled, and following the preliminaries
that had accompanied his original appearance, Fleming
put to him the crucial query: “From your conversations and
examination of Perry Edward Smith, do you have an
opinion as to whether he knew right from wrong at the time
of the offense involved in this action?” And once more the
court admonished the witness: “Answer yes or no, do you
have an opinion?”
“No.”
Amid surprised mutters, Fleming, surprised himself, said,
“You may state to the jury why you have no opinion.”
Green objected: “The man has no opinion, and that’s it.”
Which it was, legally speaking.
But had Dr. Jones been permitted to discourse on the
cause of his indecision, he would have testified: “Perry
Smith shows definite signs of severe mental illness. His
childhood, related to me and verified by portions of the
prison records, was marked by brutality and lack of concern
on the part of both parents. He seems to have grown up
without direction, without love, and without ever having
absorbed any fixed sense of moral values. . . . He is
oriented, hyperalert to things going on about him, and
shows no sign of confusion. He is above average in
intelligence, and has a good range of information
considering his poor educational background. . . . Two
features in his personality make-up stand out as particularly
pathological. The first is his ‘paranoid’ orientation toward
the world. He is suspicious and distrustful of others, tends
to feel that others discriminate against him, and feels that
others are unfair to him and do not understand him. He is
overly sensitive to criticisms that others make of him, and
cannot tolerate being made fun of. He is quick to sense
slight or insult in things others say, and frequently may
misinterpret well-meant communications. He feels he has
great need of friendship and understanding, but he is
reluctant to confide in others, and when he does, expects to
be misunderstood or even betrayed. In evaluating the
intentions and feelings of others, his ability to separate the
real situation from his own mental projections is very poor.
He not infrequently groups all people together as being
hypocritical, hostile, and deserving of whatever he is able to
do to them. Akin to this first trait is the second, an ever-
present, poorly controlled rage—easily triggered by any
feeling of being tricked, slighted, or labeled inferior by
others. For the most part, his rages in the past have been
directed at authority figures—father, brother, Army
sergeant, state parole officer—and have led to violent
assaultive behavior on several occasions. Both he and his
acquaintances have been aware of these rages, which he
says ‘mount up’ in him, and of the poor control he has over
them. When turned toward himself his anger has
precipitated ideas of suicide. The inappropriate force of his
anger and lack of ability to control or channel it reflect a
primary weakness of personality structure. . . . In addition to
these traits, the subject shows mild early signs of a
disorder of his thought processes. He has poor ability to
organize his thinking, he seems unable to scan or
summarize his thought, becoming involved and sometimes
lost in detail, and some of his thinking reflects a ‘magical’
quality, a disregard of reality. . . . He has had few close
emotional relationships with other people, and these have
not been able to stand small crises. He has little feeling for
others outside a very small circle of friends, and attaches
little real value to human life. This emotional detachment
and blandness in certain areas is other evidence of his
mental abnormality. More extensive evaluation would be
necessary to make an exact psychiatric diagnosis, but his
present personality structure is very nearly that of a
paranoid schizophrenic reaction.”
It is significant that a widely respected veteran in the field of
forensic psychiatry, Dr. Joseph Satten of the Menninger
Clinic in Topeka, Kansas, consulted with Dr. Jones and
endorsed his evaluations of Hickock and Smith. Dr. Satten,
who afterward gave the case close attention, suggests that
though the crime would not have occurred except for a
certain frictional interplay between the perpetrators, it was
essentially the act of Perry Smith, who, he feels, represents
a type of murderer described by him in an article: “Murder
Without Apparent Motive—A Study in Personality
Disorganization.”
The article, printed in The American Journal of Psychiatry
(July, 1960), and written in collaboration with three
colleagues, Karl Menninger, Irwin Rosen, and Martin
Mayman, states its aim at the outset: “In attempting to
assess the criminal responsibility of murderers, the law
tries to divide them (as it does all offenders) into two
groups, the ‘sane’ and the ‘insane.’ The ‘sane’ murderer is
thought of as acting upon rational motives that can be
understood, though condemned, and the ‘insane’ one as
being driven by irrational senseless motives. When rational
motives are conspicuous (for example, when a man kills for
personal gain) or when the irrational motives are
accompanied by delusions or hallucinations (for example, a
paranoid patient who kills his fantasied persecutor), the
situation presents little problem to the psychiatrist. But
murderers who seem rational, coherent, and controlled, and
yet whose homicidal acts have a bizarre, apparently
senseless quality, pose a difficult problem, if courtroom
disagreements and contradictory reports about the same
offender are an index. It is our thesis that the
psychopathology of such murderers forms at least one
specific syndrome which we shall describe. In general,
these individuals are predisposed to severe lapses in ego-
control which makes possible the open expression of
primitive violence, born out of previous, and now
unconscious, traumatic experiences.”
The authors, as part of an appeals process, had examined
four men convicted of seemingly unmotivated murders. All
had been examined prior to their trials, and found to be
“without psychosis” and “sane.” Three of the men were
under death sentence, and the fourth was serving a long
prison sentence. In each of these cases, further psychiatric
investigation had been requested because someone—
either the lawyer, a relative, or a friend—was dissatisfied
with the psychiatric explanations previously given, and in
effect had asked, “How can a person as sane as this man
seems to be commit an act as crazy as the one he was
convicted of?” After describing the four criminals and their
crimes (a Negro soldier who mutilated and dismembered a
prostitute, a laborer who strangled a fourteen-year-old boy
when the boy rejected his sexual advances, an Army
corporal who bludgeoned to death another young boy
because he imagined the victim was making fun of him,
and a hospital employee who drowned a girl of nine by
holding her head under water), the authors surveyed the
areas of similarity. The men themselves, they wrote, were
puzzled as to why they killed their victims, who were
relatively unknown to them, and in each instance the
murderer appears to have lapsed into a dreamlike
dissociative trance from which he awakened to “suddenly
discover” himself assaulting his victim. “The most uniform,
and perhaps the most significant, historical finding was a
long-standing, sometimes lifelong, history of erratic control
over aggressive impulses. For example, three of the men,
throughout their lives, had been frequently involved in fights
which were not ordinary altercations, and which would have
become homicidal assaults if not stopped by others.”
Here, in excerpt, are a number of other observations
contained in the study: “Despite the violence in their lives,
all of the men had ego-images of themselves as physically
inferior, weak, and inadequate. The histories revealed in
each a severe degree of sexual inhibition. To all of them,
adult women were threatening creatures, and in two cases
there was overt sexual perversion. All of them, too, had
been concerned throughout their early years about being
considered ‘sissies,’ physically undersized or sickly. . . . In
all four cases, there was historical evidence of altered
states of consciousness, frequently in connection with the
outbursts of violence. Two of the men reported severe
dissociative trancelike states during which violent and
bizarre behavior was seen, while the other two reported
less severe, and perhaps less well-organized, amnesiac
episodes. During moments of actual violence, they often felt
separated or isolated from themselves, as if they were
watching someone else. . . . Also seen in the historical
background of all the cases was the occurrence of extreme
parental violence during childhood. . . . One man said he
was ‘whipped every time Iturned around.’ . . . Another of the
men had many violent beatings in order to ‘break’ him of
his stammering and ‘fits,’ as well as to correct him for his
allegedly ‘bad’ behavior. . . . The history relating to extreme
violence, whether fantasied, observed in reality, or actually
experienced by the child, fits in with the psychoanalytic
hypothesis that the child’s exposure to overwhelming
stimuli, before he can master them, is closely linked to early
defects in ego formation and later severe disturbances in
impulse control. In all of these cases, there was evidence of
severe emotional deprivation in early life. This deprivation
may have involved prolonged or recurrent absence of one
or both parents, a chaotic family life in which the parents
were unknown, or an outright rejection of the child by one or
both parents with the child being raised by others. . . .
Evidence of disturbances in affect organization was seen.
Most typically the men displayed a tendency not to
experience anger or rage in association with violent
aggressive action. None reported feelings of rage in
connection with the murders, nor did they experience anger
in any strong or pronounced way, although each of them
was capable of enormous and brutal aggression. . . . Their
relationships with others were of a shallow, cold nature,
lending a quality of loneliness and isolation to these men.
People were scarcely real to them, in the sense of being
warmly or positively (or even angrily) felt about. . . . The
three men under sentence of death had shallow emotions
regarding their own fate and that of their victims. Guilt,
depression, and remorse were strikingly absent. . . . Such
individuals can be considered to be murder-prone in the
sense of either carrying a surcharge of aggressive energy
or having an unstable ego defense system that periodically
allows the naked and archaic expression of such energy.
The murderous potential can become activated, especially
if some disequilibrium is already present, when the victim-
to-be is unconsciously perceived as a key figure in some
past traumatic configuration. The behavior, or even the
mere presence, of this figure adds a stress to the unstable
balance of forces that results in a sudden extreme
discharge of violence, similar to the explosion that takes
place when a percussion cap ignites a charge of
dynamite. . . . The hypothesis of unconscious motivation
explains why the murderers perceived innocuous and
relatively unknown victims as provocative and thereby
suitable targets for aggression. But why murder? Most
people, fortunately, do not respond with murderous
outbursts even under extreme provocation. The cases
described, on the other hand, were predisposed to gross
lapses in reality contact and extreme weakness in impulse
control during periods of heightened tension and
disorganization. At such times, a chance acquaintance or
even a stranger was easily able to lose his ‘real’ meaning
and assume an identity in the unconscious traumatic
configuration. The ‘old’ conflict was reactivated and
aggression swiftly mounted to murderous proportions. . . .
When such senseless murders occur, they are seen to be
an end result of a period of increasing tension and
disorganization in the murderer starting before the contact
with the victim who, by fitting into the unconscious conflicts
of the murderer, unwittingly serves to set into motion his
homicidal potential.”
Because of the many parallels between the background
and personality of Perry Smith and the subjects of his study,
Dr. Satten feels secure in assigning him to a position
among their ranks. Moreover, the circumstances of the
crime seem to him to fit exactly the concept of “murder
without apparent motive.” Obviously, three of the murders
Smith committed were logically motivated—Nancy, Kenyon,
and their mother had to be killed because Mr. Clutter had
been killed. But it is Dr. Satten’s contention that only the
first murder matters psychologically, and that when Smith
attacked Mr. Clutter he was under a mental eclipse, deep
inside a schizophrenic darkness, for it was not entirely a
flesh-and-blood man he “suddenly discovered” himself
destroying, but “a key figure in some past traumatic
configuration”: his father? the orphanage nuns who had
derided and beaten him? the hated Army sergeant? the
parole officer who had ordered him to “stay out of Kansas”?
One of them, or all of them.
In his confession, Smith said, “Ididn’t want to harm the
man. Ithought he was a very nice gentleman. Softspoken. I
thought so right up to the moment Icut his throat.” While
talking to Donald Cullivan, Smith said, “They [the Clutters]
never hurt me. Like other people. Like people have all my
life. Maybe it’s just that the Clutters were the ones who had
to pay for it.”
So it would appear that by independent paths, both the
professional and the amateur analyst reached conclusions
not dissimilar.
The aristocracy of Finney County had snubbed the trial. “It
doesn’t do,” announced the wife of one rich rancher, “to
seem curious about that sort of thing.” Nevertheless, the
trial’s last session found a fair segment of the local
Establishment seated alongside the plainer citizenry. Their
presence was a courteous gesture toward Judge Tate and
Logan Green, esteemed members of their own order. Also,
a large contingent of out-of-town lawyers, many of whom
had journeyed great distances, filled several benches;
specifically, they were on hand to hear Green’s final
address to the jury. Green, a suavely tough little
septuagenarian, has an imposing reputation among his
peers, who admire his stagecraft—a repertoire of actorish
gifts that includes a sense of timing acute as a night-club
comedian’s. An expert criminal lawyer, his usual role is that
of defender, but in this instance the state had retained him
as a special assistant to Duane West, for it was felt that the
young county attorney was too unseasoned to prosecute
the case without experienced support.
But like most star turns, Green was the last act on the
program. Judge Tate’s level-headed instructions to the jury
preceded him, as did the county attorney’s summation:
“Can there be a single doubt in your minds regarding the
guilt of these defendants? No! Regardless of who pulled
the trigger on Richard Eugene Hickock’s shotgun, both
men are equally guilty. There is only one way to assure that
these men will never again roam the towns and cities of this
land. We request the maximum penalty—death. This
request is made not in vengeance, but in all
humbleness. . . .”
Then the pleas of the defense attorneys had to be heard.
Fleming’s speech, described by one journalist as “soft-sell,”
amounted to a mild churchly sermon: “Man is not an animal.
He has a body, and he has a soul that lives forever. Idon’t
believe man has the right to destroy that house, a temple, in
which the soul dwells. . . .” Harrison Smith, though he too
appealed to the jurors’ presumed Christianity, took as his
main theme the evils of capital punishment: “It is a relic of
human barbarism. The law tells us that the taking of human
life is wrong, then goes ahead and sets the example. Which
is almost as wicked as the crime it punished. The state has
no right to inflict it. It isn’t effective. It doesn’t deter crime,
but merely cheapens human life and gives rise to more
murders. All we ask is mercy. Surely life imprisonment is
small mercy to ask. . . .” Not everyone was attentive; one
juror, as though poisoned by the numerous spring-fever
yawns weighting the air, sat with drugged eyes and jaws so
utterly ajar bees could have buzzed in and out.
Green woke them up. “Gentlemen,” he said, speaking
without notes, “you have just heard two energetic pleas for
mercy in behalf of the defendants. It seems to me fortunate
that these admirable attorneys, Mr. Fleming and Mr. Smith,
were not at the Clutter house that fateful night—very
fortunate for them that they were not present to plead mercy
for the doomed family. Because had they been there—well,
come next morning we would have had more than four
corpses to count.”
As a boy in his native Kentucky, Green was called Pinky, a
nickname he owed to his freckled coloring; now, as he
strutted before the jury, the stress of his assignment
warmed his face and splotched it with patches of pink. “I
have no intention of engaging in theological debate. But I
anticipated that defense counsel would use the Holy Bible
as an argument against the death penalty. You have heard
the Bible quoted. But I can read, too.” He slapped open a
copy of the Old Testament. “And here are a few things the
Good Book has to say on the subject. In Exodus Twenty,
Verse Thirteen, we have one of the Ten Commandments:
‘Thou shalt not kill.’ This refers to unlawful killing. Of course
it does, because in the next chapter, Verse Twelve, the
penalty for disobedience of that Commandment reads: ‘He
that smiteth a man, so that he die, shall be surely put to
death.’ Now, Mr. Fleming would have you believe that all
this was changed by the coming of Christ. Not so. For
Christ says, ‘Think not that Iam come to destroy the law, or
the prophets: Iam not come to destroy, but to fulfill.’ And
finally—” Green fumbled, and seemed to accidentally shut
the Bible, whereupon the visiting legal dignitaries grinned
and nudged each other, for this was a venerable courtroom
ploy—the lawyer who while reading from the Scriptures
pretends to lose his place, and then remarks, as Green
now did, “Never mind. Ithink Ican quote from memory.
Genesis Nine, Verse Six: ‘Whoso sheddeth man’s blood,
by man shall his blood be shed.’
“But,” Green went on, “Isee nothing to be gained by arguing
the Bible. Our state provides that the punishment for murder
in the first degree shall be imprisonment for life or death by
hanging. That is the law. You, gentlemen, are here to
enforce it. And if ever there was a case in which the
maximum penalty was justified, this is it. These were
strange, ferocious murders. Four of your fellow citizens
were slaughtered like hogs in a pen. And for what reason?
Not out of vengeance or hatred. But for money. Money. It
was the cold and calculated weighing of so many ounces of
silver against so many ounces of blood. And how cheaply
those lives were bought! For forty dollars’ worth of loot! Ten
dollars a life!” He whirled, and pointed a finger that moved
back and forth between Hickock and Smith. “They went
armed with a shotgun and a dagger. They went to rob and
kill—” His voice trembled, toppled, disappeared, as though
strangled by the intensity of his own loathing for the
debonair, gum-chewing defendants. Turning again to the
jury, he hoarsely asked, “What are you going to do? What
are you going to do with these men that bind a man hand
and foot and cut his throat and blow out his brains? Give
them the minimum penalty? Yes, and that’s only one of four
counts. What about Kenyon Clutter, a young boy with his
whole life before him, tied helplessly in sight of his father’s
death struggle. Or young Nancy Clutter, hearing the
gunshots and knowing her time was next. Nancy, begging
for her life: ‘Don’t. Oh, please don’t. Please. Please.’ What
agony! What unspeakable torture! And there remains the
mother, bound and gagged and having to listen as her
husband, her beloved children died one by one. Listen until
at last the killers, these defendants before you, entered her
room, focused a flashlight in her eyes, and let the blast of a
shotgun end the existence of an entire household.”
Pausing, Green gingerly touched a boil on the back of his
neck, a mature inflammation that seemed, like its angry
wearer, about to burst. “So, gentlemen, what are you going
to do? Give them the minimum? Send them back to the
penitentiary, and take the chance of their escaping or being
paroled? The next time they go slaughtering it may be your
family. Isay to you,” he solemnly said, staring at the panel in
a manner that encompassed and challenged them all,
“some of our enormous crimes only happen because once
upon a time a pack of chickenhearted jurors refused to do
their duty. Now, gentlemen, Ileave it to you and your
consciences.”
He sat down. West whispered to him, “That was masterly,
sir.”
But a few of Green’s auditors were less enthusiastic; and
after the jury retired to discuss the verdict, one of them, a
young reporter from Oklahoma, exchanged sharp words
with another newsman, Richard Parr of the Kansas City
Star. To the Oklahoman, Green’s address had seemed
“rabble-rousing, brutal.”
“He was just telling the truth,” Parr said. “The truth can be
brutal. To coin a phrase.”
“But he didn’t have to hit that hard. It’s unfair.”
“What’s unfair?”
“The whole trial. These guys don’t stand a chance.”
“Fat chance they gave Nancy Clutter.”
“Perry Smith. My God. He’s had such a rotten life—”
Parr said, “Many a man can match sob stories with that little
bastard. Me included. Maybe Idrink too much, but Isure as
hell never killed four people in cold blood.”
“Yeah, and how about hanging the bastard? That’s pretty
goddam cold-blooded too.”
The Reverend Post, overhearing the conversation, joined
in. “Well,” he said, passing around a snapshot reproduction
of Perry Smith’s portrait of Jesus, “any man who could paint
this picture can’t be one hundred percent bad. All the same
it’s hard to know what to do. Capital punishment is no
answer: it doesn’t give the sinner time enough to come to
God. Sometimes Idespair.” A jovial fellow with gold-filled
teeth and a silvery widows peak, he jovially repeated,
“Sometimes Idespair. Sometimes Ithink old Doc Savage
had the right idea.” The Doc Savage to whom he referred
was a fictional hero popular among adolescent readers of
pulp magazines a generation ago. “If you boys remember,
Doc Savage was a kind of superman. He’d made himself
proficient in every field—medicine, science, philosophy, art.
There wasn’t much old Doc didn’t know or couldn’t do. One
of his projects was, he decided to rid the world of criminals.
First he bought a big island out in the ocean. Then he and
his assistants—he had an army of trained assistants—
kidnaped all the world’s criminals and brought them to the
island. And Doc Savage operated on their brains. He
removed the part that holds wicked thoughts. And when
they recovered they were all decent citizens. They couldn’t
commit crimes because that part of their brain was out.
Now it strikes me that surgery of this nature might really be
the answer to—”
A bell, the signal that the jury was returning, interrupted him.
The jury’s deliberations had lasted forty minutes. Many
spectators, anticipating a swift decision, had never left their
seats. Judge Tate, however, had to be fetched from his
farm, where he had gone to feed his horses. A hurriedly
donned black robe billowed about him when at last he
arrived, but it was with impressive sedateness and dignity
that he asked, “Gentlemen of the jury, have you reached
your verdicts?” Their foreman replied: “We have, Your
Honor.” The court bailiff carried the sealed verdicts to the
bench.
Train whistles, the fanfare of an approaching Santa Fe
express, penetrated the courtroom. Tate’s bass voice
interlaced with the locomotive’s cries as he read: “ ‘Count
One. We the jury find the defendant, Richard Eugene
Hickock, guilty of murder in the first degree, and the
punishment is death.’ ” Then, as though interested in their
reaction, he looked down upon the prisoners, who stood
before him handcuffed to guards; they stared back
impassively until he resumed and read the seven counts
that followed: three more convictions for Hickock, and four
for Smith.
“—and the punishment is death”; each time he came to the
sentence, Tate enunciated it with a dark-toned hollowness
that seemed to echo the train’s mournful, now fading call.
Then he dismissed the jury (“You have performed a
courageous service”), and the condemned men were led
away. At the door, Smith said to Hickock, “No chicken-
hearted jurors, they!” They both laughed loudly, and a
cameraman photographed them. The picture appeared in a
Kansas paper above a caption entitled: “The Last Laugh?”
Aweek later Mrs. Meier was sitting in her parlor talking to a
friend. “Yes, it’s turned quiet around here,” she said. “I
guess we ought to be grateful things have settled down. But
Istill feel bad about it. Inever had much truck with Dick, but
Perry and Igot to know each other real well. That afternoon,
after he heard the verdict and they brought him back up
here—Ishut myself in the kitchen to keep from having to
see him. Isat by the kitchen window and watched the crowd
leaving the courthouse. Mr. Cullivan—he looked up and
saw me and waved. The Hickocks. All going away. Just this
morning Ihad a lovely letter from Mrs. Hickock; she visited
with me several times while the trial was going on, and I
wished Icould have helped her, only what can you say to
someone in a situation like that? But after everybody had
gone, and I’d started to wash some dishes—Iheard him
crying. Iturned on the radio. Not to hear him. But Icould.
Crying like a child. He’d never broke down before, shown
any sign of it. Well, Iwent to him. The door of his cell. He
reached out his hand. He wanted me to hold his hand, and I
did, Iheld his hand, and all he said was, ‘I’m embraced by
shame.’ Iwanted to send for Father Goubeaux—Isaid first
thing tomorrow I’d make him Spanish rice—but he just held
my hand tighter.
“And that night, of all nights, we had to leave him alone.
Wendle and Ialmost never go out, but we had a long-
standing engagement, and Wendle didn’t think we ought to
break it. But I’ll always be sorry we left him alone. Next day I
did fix the rice. He wouldn’t touch it. Or hardly speak to me.
He hated the whole world. But the morning the men came to
take him to the penitentiary, he thanked me and gave me a
picture of himself. A little Kodak made when he was sixteen
years old. He said it was how he wanted me to remember
him, like the boy in the picture.
“The bad part was saying goodbye. When you knew where
he was going, and what would happen to him. That squirrel
of his, he sure misses Perry. Keeps coming to the cell
looking for him. I’ve tried to feed him, but he won’t have
anything to do with me. It was just Perry he liked.”
Prisons are important to the economy of Leavenworth
County, Kansas. The two state penitentiaries, one for each
sex, are situated there; so is Leavenworth, the largest
Federal prison, and, at Fort Leavenworth, the country’s
principal military prison, the grim United States Army and
Air Force Disciplinary Barracks. If all the inmates in these
institutions were let free, they could populate a small city.
The oldest of the prisons is the Kansas State Penitentiary
for Men, a turreted black-and-white palace that visually
distinguishes an otherwise ordinary rural town, Lansing.
Built during the Civil War, it received its first resident in
1864. Nowadays the convict population averages around
two thousand; the present warden, Sherman H. Crouse,
keeps a chart which lists the daily total according to race
(for example, White 1405, Colored 360, Mexicans 12,
Indians 6). Whatever his race, each convict is a citizen of a
stony village that exists within the prison’s steep, machine-
gun-guarded walls—twelve gray acres of cement streets
and cell blocks and workshops.
In a south section of the prison compound there stands a
curious little building: a dark two-storied building shaped
like a coffin. This establishment, officially called the
Segregation and Isolation Building, constitutes a prison
inside a prison. Among the inmates, the lower floor is
known as The Hole—the place to which difficult prisoners,
the “hardrock” troublemakers, are now and then banished.
The upper story is reached by climbing a circular iron
staircase; at the top is Death Row.
The first time the Clutter murderers ascended the staircase
was late one rainy April afternoon. Having arrived at
Lansing after an eight-hour, four-hundred-mile car ride from
Garden City, the newcomers had been stripped, showered,
given close haircuts, and supplied with coarse denim
uniforms and soft slippers (in most American prisons such
slippers are a condemned man’s customary footwear); then
armed escorts marched them through a wet twilight to the
coffin-shaped edifice, hustled them up the spiral stairs and
into two of the twelve side-by-side cells that comprise
Lansing’s Death Row.
The cells are identical. They measure seven by ten feet,
and are unfurnished except for a cot, a toilet, a basin, and
an overhead light bulb that is never extinguished night or
day. The cell windows are very narrow, and not only barred
but covered with a wire mesh black as a widow’s veil; thus
the faces of those sentenced to hang can be but hazily
discerned by passers-by. The doomed themselves can see
out well enough; what they see is an empty dirt lot that
serves in summer as a baseball diamond, beyond the lot a
piece of prison wall, and above that, a piece of sky.
The wall is made of rough stone; pigeons nest inside its
crevices. A rusty iron door, set into the part of the wall
visible to the Row’s occupants, rouses the pigeons
whenever it is opened, puts them in a flap, for the hinges
creak so, scream. The door leads into a cavernous storage
room, where on even the warmest day the air is moist and
chilly. A number of things are kept there: stockpiles of metal
used by the convicts to manufacture automobile license
plates, lumber, old machinery, baseball paraphernalia—
and also an unpainted wooden gallows that smells faintly of
pine. For this is the state’s execution chamber; when a man
is brought here to be hanged, the prisoners say he has
“gone to The Corner,” or, alternatively, “paid a visit to the
warehouse.”
In accordance with the sentence of the court, Smith and
Hickock were scheduled to visit the warehouse six weeks
hence: at one minute after midnight on Friday, May 13,
1960.
Kansas abolished capital punishment in 1907; in 1935,
due to a sudden prevalence in the Midwest of rampaging
professional criminals (Alvin “Old Creepy” Karpis, Charles
“Pretty Boy” Floyd, Clyde Barrow and his homicidal
sweetheart, Bonnie Parker), the state legislators voted to
restore it. However, it was not until 1944 that an executioner
had a chance to employ his craft; over the next ten years he
was given nine additional opportunities. But for six years, or
since 1954, there had been no pay checks for a hangman
in Kansas (except at the Army and Air Force Disciplinary
Barracks, which also has a gallows). The late George
Docking, Governor of Kansas from 1957 through 1960,
was responsible for this hiatus, for he was unreservedly
opposed to the death penalty (“Ijust don’t like killing
people”).
Now, at that time—April, 1960—there were in United
States prisons one hundred and ninety persons awaiting
civil execution; five, the Clutter killers included, were among
the lodgers at Lansing. Occasionally, important visitors to
the prison are invited to take what one high official calls “a
little peek at Death Row.” Those who accept are assigned
a guard who, as he leads the tourist along the iron walkway
fronting the death cells, is likely to identify the condemned
with what he must consider comic formality. “And this,” he
said to a visitor in 1960, “this is Mr. Perry Edward Smith.
Now next door, that’s Mr. Smith’s buddy, Mr. Richard
Eugene Hickock. And over here we have Mr. Earl Wilson.
And after Mr. Wilson—meet Mr. Bobby Joe Spencer. And
as for this last gentleman, I’m sure you recognize the
famous Mr. Lowell Lee Andrews.”
Earl Wilson, a husky, hymn-singing Negro, had been
sentenced to die for the kidnaping, rape, and torture of a
young white woman; the victim, though she survived, was
left severely disabled. Bobby Joe Spencer, white, an
effeminate youth, had confessed to murdering an elderly
Kansas City woman, the owner of a rooming house where
he lived. Prior to leaving office in January, 1961, Governor
Docking, who had been defeated for re-election (in large
measure because of his attitude toward capital
punishment), commuted the sentences of both these men
to life imprisonment, which generally meant that they could
apply for parole in seven years. However, Bobby Joe
Spencer soon killed again: stabbed with a shiv another
young convict, his rival for the affections of an older inmate
(as one prison officer said, “Just two punks fighting over a
jocker”). This deed earned Spencer a second life sentence.
But the public was not much aware of either Wilson or
Spencer; compared to Smith and Hickock, or the fifth man
on the Row, Lowell Lee Andrews, the press had rather
slighted them.
Two years earlier Lowell Lee Andrews, an enormous,
weak-eyed boy of eighteen who wore horn-rimmed glasses
and weighed almost three hundred pounds, had been a
sophomore at the University of Kansas, an honor student
majoring in biology. Though he was a solitary creature,
withdrawn and seldom communicative, his acquaintances,
both at the university and in his home town of Wolcott,
Kansas, regarded him as exceptionally gentle and “sweet-
natured” (later one Kansas paper printed an article about
him entitled: “The Nicest Boy in Wolcott”). But inside the
quiet young scholar there existed a second, unsuspected
personality, one with stunted emotions and a distorted mind
through which cold thoughts flowed in cruel directions. His
family—his parents and a slightly older sister, Jennie
Marie-would have been astounded had they known the
daydreams Lowell Lee dreamed throughout the summer
and autumn of 1958; the brilliant son, the adored brother,
was planning to poison them all.
The elder Andrews was a prosperous farmer; he had not
much money in the bank, but he owned land valued at
approximately two hundred thousand dollars. A desire to
inherit this estate was ostensibly the motivation behind
Lowell Lee’s plot to destroy his family. For the secret Lowell
Lee, the one concealed inside the shy churchgoing biology
student, fancied himself an ice-hearted master criminal: he
wanted to wear gangsterish silk shirts and drive scarlet
sports cars; he wanted to be recognized as no mere
bespectacled, bookish, overweight, virginal schoolboy; and
while he did not dislike any member of his family, at least
not consciously, murdering them seemed the swiftest, most
sensible way of implementing the fantasies that possessed
him. Arsenic was the weapon he decided upon; after
poisoning the victims, he meant to tuck them in their beds
and burn down the house, in the hope that investigators
would believe the deaths accidental. However, one detail
perturbed him: suppose autopsies revealed the presence
of arsenic? And suppose the purchase of the poison could
be traced to him? Toward the end of summer he evolved
another plan. He spent three months polishing it. Finally,
there came a near-zero November night when he was
ready to act.
It was Thanksgiving week, and Lowell Lee was home for
the holidays, as was Jennie Marie, an intelligent but rather
plain girl who attended a college in Oklahoma. On the
evening of November 28, somewhere around seven,
Jennie Marie was sitting with her parents in the parlor
watching television; Lowell Lee was locked in his bedroom
reading the last chapter of The Brothers Karamazov. That
task completed, he shaved, changed into his best suit, and
proceeded to load both a semi-automatic .22-caliber rifle
and a Ruger .22-caliber revolver. He fitted the revolver into
a hip holster, shouldered the rifle, and ambled down a hall
to the parlor, which was dark except for the flickering
television screen. He switched on a light, aimed the rifle,
pulled the trigger, and hit his sister between the eyes, killing
her instantly. He shot his mother three times, and his father
twice. The mother, eyes gaping, arms outstretched,
staggered toward him; she tried to speak, her mouth
opened, closed, but Lowell Lee said: “Shut up.” To be
certain she obeyed him, he shot her three times more. Mr.
Andrews, however, was still alive; sobbing, whimpering, he
thrashed along the floor toward the kitchen, but at the
kitchen’s threshold the son unholstered his revolver and
discharged every chamber, then reloaded the weapon and
emptied it again; altogether, his father absorbed seventeen
bullets.
Andrews, according to statements credited to him, “didn’t
feel anything about it. The time came, and Iwas doing what
Ihad to do. That’s all there was to it.” After the shootings he
raised a window in his bedroom and removed the screen,
then roamed the house rifling dresser drawers and
scattering the contents: it was his intention to blame the
crime on thieves. Later, driving his father’s car, he traveled
forty miles over snow-slippery roads to Lawrence, the town
where the University of Kansas is located; en route, he
parked on a bridge, dismantled his lethal artillery, and
disposed of it by dropping the parts into the Kansas River.
But of course the journey’s true purpose was to arrange an
alibi. First he stopped at the campus house where he
roomed; he talked with the landlady, told her that he had
come to pick up his typewriter, and that because of the bad
weather the trip from Wolcott to Lawrence had taken two
hours. Departing, he visited a movie theater, where,
uncharacteristically, he chatted with an usher and a candy
vendor. At eleven, when the movie let out, he returned to
Wolcott. The family’s mongrel dog was waiting on the front
porch; it was whining with hunger, so Lowell Lee, entering
the house and stepping across his father’s corpse,
prepared a bowl of warm milk and mush; then, while the
dog was lapping it up, he telephoned the sheriff’s office and
said, “My name is Lowell Lee Andrews. Ilive at 6040
Wolcott Drive, and Iwant to report a robbery—”
Four officers of the Wyandotte County Sheriff’s Patrol
responded. One of the group, Patrolman Meyers,
described the scene as follows: “Well, it was one in the
morning when we got there. All the lights in the house was
on. And this big dark-haired boy, Lowell Lee, he was sitting
on the porch petting his dog. Patting it on the head.
Lieutenant Athey asked the boy what happened, and he
pointed to the door, real casual, and said, ‘Look in there.’ ”
Having looked, the astonished officers summoned the
county coroner, a gentleman who was also impressed by
young Andrews’ callous nonchalance, for when the coroner
asked him what funeral arrangements he wished to have
made, Andrews replied with a shrug, “I don’t care what you
do with them.”
Shortly, two senior detectives appeared and began to
question the family’s lone survivor. Though convinced he
was lying, the detectives listened respectfully to the tale of
how he had driven to Lawrence to fetch a typewriter, gone
to a movie, and arrived home after midnight to find the
bedrooms ransacked and his family slain. He stayed with
the story, and might never have altered it if, subsequent to
his arrest and removal to the county jail, the authorities had
not obtained the aid of the Reverend Mr. Virto C. Dameron.
The Reverend Dameron, a Dickensian personage, an
unctuous and jolly brimstone-and-damnation orator, was
minister of the Grandview Baptist Church in Kansas City,
Kansas, the church the Andrews family attended regularly.
Awakened by an urgent call from the county coroner,
Dameron presented himself at the jail around 3:00 A.M.,
whereupon detectives, who had been strenuously but
abortively interrogating the suspect, withdrew to another
room, leaving the minister to consult privately with his
parishioner. It proved a fatal interview for the latter, who
many months afterward gave this account of it to a friend:
“Mr. Dameron said, ‘Now, Lee, I’ve known you all your life.
Since you were just a little tadpole. And Iknew your daddy
all his life, we grew up together, we were childhood friends.
And that’s why I’m here—not just because I’m your minister,
but because Ifeel like you’re a member of my own family.
And because you need a friend that you can talk to and
trust. And Ifeel terrible about this terrible event, and I’m
every bit as anxious as you are to see the guilty party
caught and punished.’
“He wanted to know was Ithirsty, and Iwas, so he got me a
Coke, and after that he’s going on about the Thanksgiving
vacation and how do Ilike school, when all of a sudden he
says, ‘Now, Lee, there seems to be some doubt among the
people here regarding your innocence. I’m sure you’d be
willing to take a lie detector and convince these men of your
innocence so they can get busy and catch the guilty party.’
Then he said, ‘Lee, you didn’t do this terrible thing, did you?
If you did, now is the time to purge your soul.’ The next thing
was, Ithought what difference does it make, and Itold him
the truth, most everything about it. He kept wagging his
head and rolling his eyes and rubbing his hands together,
and he said it was a terrible thing, and Iwould have to
answer to the Almighty, have to purge my soul by telling the
officers what I’d told him, and would I?” Receiving an
affirmative nod, the prisoner’s spiritual adviser stepped into
an adjacent room, which was crowded with expectant
policemen, and elatedly issued an invitation: “Come on in.
The boy’s ready to make a statement.”
The Andrews case became the basis for a legal and
medical crusade. Prior to the trial, at which Andrews
pleaded innocent by reason of insanity, the psychiatric staff
of the Menninger Clinic conducted an exhaustive
examination of the accused; this produced a diagnosis of
“schizophrenia, simple type.” By “simple,” the
diagnosticians meant that Andrews suffered no delusions,
no false perceptions, no hallucinations, but the primary
illness of separation of thinking from feeling. He understood
the nature of his acts, and that they were prohibited, and
that he was subject to punishment. “But,” to quote Dr.
Joseph Satten, one of the examiners, “Lowell Lee Andrews
felt no emotions whatsoever. He considered himself the
only important, only significant person in the world. And in
his own seclusive world it seemed to him just as right to kill
his mother as to kill an animal or a fly.”
In the opinion of Dr. Satten and his colleagues, Andrews’
crime amounted to such an undebatable example of
diminished responsibility that the case offered an ideal
chance to challenge the M’Naghten Rule in Kansas courts.
The M’Naghten Rule, as has been previously stated,
recognizes no form of insanity provided the defendant has
the capacity to discriminate between right and wrong—
legally, not morally. Much to the distress of psychiatrists and
liberal jurists, the Rule prevails in the courts of the British
Commonwealth and, in the United States, in the courts of all
but half a dozen or so of the states and the District of
Columbia, which abide by the more lenient, though to some
minds impractical, Durham Rule, which is simply that an
accused is not criminally responsible if his unlawful act is
the product of mental disease or mental defect.
In short, what Andrews’ defenders, a team composed of
Menninger Clinic psychiatrists and two first-class attorneys,
hoped to achieve was a victory of legal-landmark stature.
The great essential was to persuade the court to substitute
the Durham Rule for the M’Naghten Rule. If that happened,
then Andrews, because of the abundant evidence
concerning his schizophrenic condition, would certainly be
sentenced not to the gallows, or even to prison, but to
confinement in the State Hospital for the Criminally Insane.
However, the defense reckoned without the defendant’s
religious counselor, the tireless Reverend Mr. Dameron,
who appeared at the trial as the chief witness for the
prosecution, and who, in the overwrought, rococo style of a
tent-show revivalist, told the court he had often warned his
former Sunday School pupil of God’s impending wrath: “I
says, there isn’t anything in this world that is worth more
than your soul, and you have acknowledged to me a
number of times in our conversations that your faith is
weak, that you have no faith in God. You know that all sin is
against God and God is your final judge, and you have got
to answer to Him. That is what Isaid to make him feel the
terribleness of the thing he’d done, and that he had to
answer to the Almighty for this crime.”
Apparently the Reverend Dameron was determined young
Andrews should answer not only to the Almighty, but also to
more temporal powers, for it was his testimony, added to
the defendant’s confession, that settled matters. The
presiding judge upheld the M’Naghten Rule, and the jury
gave the state the death penalty it demanded.
Friday, May 13, the first date set for the execution of Smith
and Hickock, passed harmlessly, the Kansas Supreme
Court having granted them a stay pending the outcome of
appeals for a new trial filed by their lawyers. At that time the
Andrews verdict was under review by the same court.
Perry’s cell adjoined Dick’s; though invisible to each other,
they could easily converse, yet Perry seldom spoke to Dick,
and it wasn’t because of any declared animosity between
them (after the exchange of a few tepid reproaches, their
relationship had turned into one of mutual toleration: the
acceptance of uncongenial but helpless Siamese twins); it
was because Perry, cautious as always, secretive,
suspicious, disliked having the guards and other inmates
overhear his “private business”—especially Andrews, or
Andy, as he was called on the Row. Andrews’ educated
accent and the formal quality of his college-trained
intelligence were anathema to Perry, who though he had
not gone beyond third grade, imagined himself more
learned than most of his acquaintances, and enjoyed
correcting them, especially their grammar and
pronunciation. But here suddenly was someone—“just a
kid!”—constantly correcting him. Was it any wonder he
never opened his mouth? Better to keep your mouth shut
than to risk one of the college kid’s snotty lines, like: “Don’t
say disinterested. When what you mean is uninterested.”
Andrews meant well, he was without malice, but Perry could
have boiled him in oil—yet he never admitted it, never let
anyone there guess why, after one of these humiliating
incidents, he sat and sulked and ignored the meals that
were delivered to him three times a day. At the beginning of
June he stopped eating altogether—he told Dick, “You can
wait around for the rope. But not me”—and from that
moment he refused to touch food or water, or say one word
to anybody.
The fast lasted five days before the warden took it
seriously. On the sixth day he ordered Smith transferred to
the prison hospital, but the move did not lessen Perry’s
resolve; when attempts were made to force-feed him he
fought back, tossed his head and clenched his jaws until
they were rigid as horseshoes. Eventually, he had to be
pinioned and fed intravenously or through a tube inserted in
a nostril. Even so, over the next nine weeks his weight fell
from 168 to 115 pounds, and the warden was warned that
forced-feeding alone could not keep the patient alive
indefinitely.
Dick, though impressed by Perry’s will power, would not
concede that his purpose was suicide; even when Perry
was reported to be in a coma, he told Andrews, with whom
he had become friendly, that his former confederate was
faking. “He just wants them to think he’s crazy.”
Andrews, a compulsive eater (he had filled a scrapbook
with illustrated edibles, everything from strawberry
shortcake to roasted pig), said, “Maybe he is crazy.
Starving himself like that.”
“He just wants to get out of here. Play-acting. So they’ll say
he’s crazy and put him in the crazy house.”
Dick afterward grew fond of quoting Andrews’ reply, for it
seemed to him a fine specimen of the boy’s “funny
thinking,” his “off on a cloud” complacency. “Well,” Andrews
allegedly said, “it sure strikes me a hard way to do it.
Starving yourself. Because sooner or later we’ll all get out
of here. Either walk out—or be carried out in a coffin.
Myself, Idon’t care whether Iwalk or get carried. It’s all the
same in the end.”
Dick said, “The trouble with you, Andy, you’ve got no
respect for human life. Including your own.”
Andrews agreed. “And,” he said, “I’ll tell you something
else. If ever Ido get out of here alive, Imean over the walls
and clear out—well, maybe nobody will know where Andy
went, but they’ll sure hell know where Andy’s been.”
All summer Perry undulated between half-awake stupors
and sickly, sweat-drenched sleep. Voices roared through
his head; one voice persistently asked him, “Where is
Jesus? Where?” And once he woke up shouting, “The bird
is Jesus! The bird is Jesus!” His favorite old theatrical
fantasy, the one in which he thought of himself as “Perry
O’Parsons, The One-Man Symphony,” returned in the guise
of a recurrent dream. The dream’s geographical center
was a Las Vegas night-club where, wearing a white top hat
and a white tuxedo, he strutted about a spotlighted stage
playing in turn a harmonica, a guitar, a banjo, drums, sang
“You Are My Sunshine,” and tap-danced up a short flight of
gold-painted prop steps; at the top, standing on a platform,
he took a bow. There was no applause, none, and yet
thousands of patrons packed the vast and gaudy room—a
strange audience, mostly men and mostly Negroes. Staring
at them, the perspiring entertainer at last understood their
silence, for suddenly he knew that these were phantoms,
the ghosts of the legally annihilated, the hanged, the
gassed, the electrocuted—and in the same instant he
realized that he was there to join them, that the gold-painted
steps had led to a scaffold, that the platform on which he
stood was opening beneath him. His top hat tumbled;
urinating, defecating, Perry O’Parsons entered eternity.
One afternoon he escaped from a dream and wakened to
find the warden standing beside his bed. The warden said,
“Sounds like you were having a little nightmare?” But Perry
wouldn’t answer him, and the warden, who on several
occasions had visited the hospital and tried to persuade
the prisoner to cease his fast, said, “Ihave something here.
From your father. Ithought you might want to see it.” Perry,
his eyes glitteringly immense in a face now almost
phosphorescently pale, studied the ceiling; and presently,
after placing a picture postcard on the patient’s bedside
table, the rebuffed visitor departed.
That night Perry looked at the card. It was addressed to the
warden, and postmarked Blue Lake, California; the
message, written in a familiar stubby script, said: “Dear Sir,
Iunderstand you have my boy Perry back in custody. Write
me please what did he do wrong and if Icome there could I
see him. Alls well with me and trust the same with you. Tex
J. Smith.” Perry destroyed the card, but his mind preserved
it, for the few crude words had resurrected him emotionally,
revived love and hate, and reminded him that he was still
what he had tried not to be—alive. “And Ijust decided,” he
later informed a friend, “that Iought to stay that way.
Anybody wanted my life wasn’t going to get any more help
from me. They’d have to fight for it.”
The next morning he asked for a glass of milk, the first
sustenance he had volunteered to accept in fourteen
weeks. Gradually, on a diet of eggnogs and orange juice,
he regained weight; by October the prison physician, Dr.
Robert Moore, considered him strong enough to be
returned to the Row. When he arrived there, Dick laughed
and said, “Welcome home, honey.”
Two years passed.
The departures of Wilson and Spencer left Smith and
Hickock and Andrews alone with the Row’s burning lights
and veiled windows. The privileges granted ordinary
prisoners were denied them; no radios or card games, not
even an exercise period—indeed, they were never allowed
out of their cells, except each Saturday when they were
taken to a shower room, then given a once-weekly change
of clothing; the only other occasions for momentary release
were the far-between visits of lawyers or relatives. Mrs.
Hickock came once a month; her husband had died, she
had lost the farm, and, as she told Dick, lived now with one
relative, now another.
It seemed to Perry as though he existed “deep
underwater”—perhaps because the Row usually was as
gray and quiet as ocean depths, soundless except for
snores, coughs, the whisper of slippered feet, the feathery
racket of the pigeons nesting in the prison walls. But not
always. “Sometimes,” Dick wrote in a letter to his mother,
“you can’t hear yourself think. They throw men in the cells
downstairs, what they call the hole, and plenty of them are
fighting mad and crazy to boot. Curse and scream the
whole time. It’s intolerable, so everybody starts yelling shut
up. Iwish you’d send me earplugs. Only they wouldn’t allow
me to have them. No rest for the wicked, Iguess.”
The little building had been standing for more than a
century, and seasonal changes provoked different
symptoms of its antiquity: winter cold saturated the stone-
and-iron fixtures, and in summer, when temperatures often
hurtled over the hundred mark, the old cells were
malodorous cauldrons. “So hot my skin stings,” Dick wrote
in a letter dated July 5, 1961. “Itry not to move much. Ijust
sit on the floor. My bed’s too sweaty to lie down, and the
smell makes me sick because of only the one bath a week
and always wearing the same clothes. No ventilation
whatever and the light bulbs make everything hotter. Bugs
keep bumping on the walls.”
Unlike conventional prisoners, the condemned are not
subjected to a work routine; they can do with their time what
they like—sleep all day, as Perry frequently did (“Ipretend
I’m a tiny little baby that can’t keep its eyes open”); or, as
was Andrews’ habit, read all night. Andrews averaged
fifteen to twenty books a week; his taste encompassed
both trash and belles-lettres, and he liked poetry, Robert
Frost’s particularly, but he also admired Whitman, Emily
Dickinson, and the comic poems of Ogden Nash. Though
the quenchless quality of his literary thirst had soon
depleted the shelves of the prison library, the prison
chaplain and others sympathetic to Andrews kept him
supplied with parcels from the Kansas City public library.
Dick was rather a bookworm, too; but his interest was
restricted to two themes—sex, as represented in the novels
of Harold Robbins and Irving Wallace (Perry, after being
lent one of these by Dick, returned it with an indignant note:
“Degenerate filth for filthy degenerate minds!”), and law
literature. He consumed hours each day leafing through law
books, compiling research that he hoped would help
reverse his conviction. Also, in pursuit of the same cause
he fired off a cannonade of letters to such organizations as
the American Civil Liberties Union and the Kansas State
Bar Association—letters attacking his trial as a “travesty of
due process,” and urging the recipients to aid him in his
quest for a new trial. Perry was persuaded to draft similar
pleas, but when Dick suggested that Andy follow their
example by writing protests in his own behalf, Andrews
replied, “I’ll worry about my neck and you worry about
yours.” (Actually, Dick’s neck was not the part of his
anatomy that most immediately troubled him. “My hair is
coming out by the handfuls,” he confided in yet another
letter to his mother. “I’m frantic. Nobody in our family was
baldheaded as Ican recall, and it makes me frantic the
idea of being an ugly old baldhead.”)
The Row’s two night guards, arriving at work on an autumn
evening in 1961, had a piece of news. “Well,” one of them
announced, “seems like you boys can expect company.”
The import of the remark was clear to his audience: it
meant that two young soldiers, who had been standing trial
for the murder of a Kansas railroad worker, had received
the ultimate sentence. “Yessir,” the guard said, confirming
this, “they got the death penalty.” Dick said, “Sure. It’s very
popular in Kansas. Juries hand it out like they were giving
candy to kids.”
One of the soldiers, George Ronald York, was eighteen; his
companion, James Douglas Latham, was a year older.
They were both exceptionally personable, which perhaps
explains why hordes of teen-aged girls had attended their
trial. Though convicted of a single slaying, the pair had
claimed seven victims in the course of a cross-country
murder spree.
Ronnie York, blond and blue-eyed, had been born and
raised in Florida, where his father was a well-known, well-
paid deep-sea diver. The Yorks had a pleasantly
comfortable home life, and Ronnie, overloved and
overpraised by his parents and a worshipful younger sister,
was the adored center of it. Latham’s background was at
the opposite extreme, being every bit as bleak as Perry
Smith’s. Born in Texas, he was the youngest child of fertile,
moneyless, embattled parents who, when finally they
separated, left their progeny to fend for themselves, to
scatter hither and thither, loose and unwanted as bundles of
Panhandle tumbleweed. At seventeen, in need of a refuge,
Latham enlisted in the Army; two years later, found guilty of
an AWOL offense, he was imprisoned in the stockade at
Fort Hood, Texas. It was there that he met Ronnie York,
who was also under sentence for having gone AWOL.
Though they were very unlike—even physically, York being
tall and phlegmatic, whereas the Texan was a short young
man with foxy brown eyes animating a compact, cute little
face—they found they shared at least one firm opinion: the
world was hateful, and everybody in it would be better off
dead. “It’s a rotten world,” Latham said. “There’s no answer
to it but meanness. That’s all anybody understands—
meanness. Burn down the man’s barn—he’ll understand
that. Poison his dog. Kill him.” Ronnie said Latham was
“one hundred percent correct,” adding, “Anyway, anybody
you kill, you’re doing them a favor.”
The first person they chose to so favor were two Georgia
women, respectable housewives who had the misfortune to
encounter York and Latham not long after the murderous
pair escaped from the Fort Hood stockade, stole a pickup
truck, and drove to Jacksonville, Florida, York’s home town.
The scene of the encounter was an Esso station on the
dark outskirts of Jacksonville; the date was the night of May
29, 1961. Originally, the absconding soldiers had traveled
to the Florida city with the intention of visiting York’s family;
once there, however, York decided it might be unwise to
contact his parents; his father sometimes had quite a
temper. He and Latham talked it over, and New Orleans
was their new destination when they stopped at the Esso
station to buy gas. Alongside them another car was
imbibing fuel; it contained the two matronly victims-to-be,
who, after a day of shopping and pleasure in Jacksonville,
were returning to their homes in a small town near the
Florida-Georgia border. Alas, they had lost their way. York,
from whom they asked directions, was most obliging: “You
just follow us. We’ll put you on the right road.” But the road
to which he led them was very wrong indeed: a narrow
side-turning that petered off into swamp. Nevertheless, the
ladies followed along faithfully until the lead vehicle halted,
and they saw, in the shine of their headlights, the helpful
young men approaching them on foot, and saw, but too
late, that each was armed with a black bullwhip. The whips
were the property of the stolen truck’s rightful custodian, a
cattleman; it had been Latham’s notion to use them as
garrotes—which, after robbing the women, is what they did.
In New Orleans the boys bought a pistol and carved two
notches in the handle.
During the next ten days notches were added in Tullahoma,
Tennessee, where they acquired a snappy red Dodge
convertible by shooting the owner, a traveling salesman;
and in an Illinois suburb of St. Louis, where two more men
were slain. The Kansas victim, who followed the preceding
five, was a grandfather; his name was Otto Ziegler, he was
sixty-two, a robust, friendly fellow, the sort not likely to pass
distressed motorists without offering assistance. While
spinning along a Kansas highway one fine June morning,
Mr. Ziegler spied a red convertible parked by the roadside,
its hood up, and a couple of nice-looking youngsters
fiddling with the motor. How was the good-hearted Mr.
Ziegler to know that nothing ailed the machine—that this
was a ruse devised to rob and kill would-be Samaritans?
His last words were, “Anything Ican do?” York, at a
distance of twenty feet, sent a bullet crashing through the
old man’s skull, then turned to Latham and said, “Pretty
good shootin’, huh?”
Their final victim was the most pathetic. It was a girl, only
eighteen; she was employed as a maid in a Colorado
motel where the rampaging pair spent a night, during which
she let them make love to her. Then they told her they were
on their way to California, and invited her to come along.
“Come on,” Latham urged her, “maybe we’ll all end up
movie stars.” The girl and her hastily packed cardboard
suitcase ended up as blood-soaked wreckage at the
bottom of a ravine near Craig, Colorado; but not many
hours after she had been shot and thrown there, her
assassins were in fact performing before motion-picture
cameras.
Descriptions of the red car’s occupants, provided by
witnesses who had noticed them loitering in the area where
Otto Ziegler’s body was discovered, had been circulated
through the Midwest and Western states. Roadblocks were
erected, and helicopters patrolled the highways; it was a
roadblock in Utah that caught York and Latham. Later, at
Police Headquarters in Salt Lake City, a local television
company was allowed to film an interview with them. The
result, if viewed without sound, would seem to concern two
cheerful, milkfed athletes discussing hockey or baseball—
anything but murder and the roles, boastfully confessed,
they had played in the deaths of seven people. “Why,” the
interviewer asks, “why did you do it?” And York, with a self-
congratulatory grin, answers, “We hate the world.”
All five of the states that vied for the right to prosecute York
and Latham endorse judicial homicide: Florida
(electrocution), Tennessee (electrocution), Illinois
(electrocution), Kansas (hanging), and Colorado (lethal
gas). But because it had the firmest evidence, Kansas was
victorious.
The men on the Row first met their new companions
November 2, 1961. A guard, escorting the arrivals to their
cells, introduced them: “Mr. York, Mr. Latham, I’d like you to
know Mr. Smith here. And Mr. Hickock. And Mr. Lowell Lee
Andrews— ‘the nicest boy in Wolcott!’ ”
When the parade had passed, Hickock heard Andrews
chuckling, and said, “What’s so funny about that
sonofabitch?”
“Nothing,” Andrews said. “But Iwas thinking: when you
count my three and your four and their seven, that makes
fourteen of them and five of us. Now five into fourteen
averages out—”
“Four into fourteen,” Hickock curtly corrected him. “There
are four killers up here and one railroaded man. I’m no
goddam killer. Inever touched a hair on a human head.”
Hickock continued writing letters protesting his conviction,
and one of these at last bore fruit. The recipient, Everett
Steerman, Chairman of the Legal Aid Committee of the
Kansas State Bar Association, was disturbed by the
allegations of the sender, who insisted that he and his co-
defendant had not had a fair trial. According to Hickock, the
“hostile atmosphere” in Garden City had made it
impossible to empanel an unbiased jury, and therefore a
change of venue should have been granted. As for the
jurors that were chosen, at least two had clearly indicated a
presumption of guilt during the voir dire examination
(“When asked to state his opinion of capital punishment,
one man said that ordinarily he was against it, but in this
case no”); unfortunately, the voir dire had not been
recorded because Kansas law does not require it unless a
specific demand is made. Many of the jurors, moreover,
were “well acquainted with the deceased. So was the
judge. Judge Tate was an intimate friend of Mr. Clutter.”
But the bulkiest of Hickock’s mudpies was aimed at the two
defense attorneys, Arthur Fleming and Harrison Smith,
whose “incompetence and inadequacy” were the chief
cause of the correspondent’s present predicament, for no
real defense had been prepared or offered by them, and
this lack of effort, it was implied, had been deliberate—an
act of collusion between the defense and the prosecution.
These were grave assertions, reflecting upon the integrity
of two respected lawyers and a distinguished district judge,
but if even partially true, then the constitutional rights of the
defendants had been abused. Prompted by Mr. Steerman,
the Bar Association undertook a course of action without
precedent in Kansas legal history: it appointed a young
Wichita attorney, Russell Shultz, to investigate the charges
and, should evidence warrant it, challenge the validity of the
conviction by bringing habeas corpus proceedings in the
Kansas Supreme Court, which had recently upheld the
verdict.
It would appear that Shultz’s investigation was rather one-
sided, since it consisted of little more than an interview with
Smith and Hickock, from which the lawyer emerged with
crusading phrases for the press: “The question is this—do
poor, plainly guilty defendants have a right to a complete
defense? Ido not believe that the State of Kansas would be
either greatly or for long harmed by the death of these
appellants. But Ido not believe it could ever recover from
the death of due process.”
Shultz filed his habeas corpus petition, and the Kansas
Supreme Court commissioned one of its own retired
justices, the Honorable Walter G. Thiele, to conduct a full-
scale hearing. And so it came to pass that almost two
years after the trial, the whole cast reassembled in the
courtroom at Garden City. The only important participants
absent were the original defendants; in their stead, as it
were, stood Judge Tate, old Mr. Fleming, and Harrison
Smith, whose careers were imperiled—not because of the
appellant’s allegations per se, but because of the apparent
credit the Bar Association bestowed upon them.
The hearing, which at one point was transferred to Lansing,
where Judge Thiele heard Smith and Hickock testify, took
six days to complete; ultimately, every point was covered.
Eight jurors swore they had never known any member of the
slain family; four admitted some slight acquaintance with
Mr. Clutter, but each, including N. L. Dunnan, the airport
operator who had made the controversial reply during the
voir dire, testified that he had entered the jurybox with an
unprejudiced mind. Shultz challenged Dunnan: “Do you feel,
sir, that you would have been willing to go to trial with a juror
whose state of mind was the same as yours?” Dunnan said
yes, he would; and Shultz then said, “Do you recall being
asked whether or not you were averse to capital
punishment?” Nodding, the witness answered, “Itold them
under normal conditions Iwould probably be averse to it.
But with the magnitude of this crime Icould probably vote in
favor.”
Tangling with Tate was more difficult: Shultz soon realized
he had a tiger by the tail. Responding to questions relevant
to his supposed intimacy with Mr. Clutter, the judge said,
“He [Clutter] was once a litigant in this court, a case over
which Ipresided, a damage action involving an airplane
falling on his property; he was suing for damages to—I
believe some fruit trees. Other than that, Ihad no occasion
to associate with him. None whatever. Isaw him perhaps
once or twice in the course of a year . . .” Shultz,
floundering, switched the subject. “Do you know,” he asked,
“what the attitude of the people was in this community after
the apprehension of these two men?” “Ibelieve Ido,” the
judge told him with scathing confidence. “It is my opinion
that the attitude toward them was that of anyone else
charged with a criminal offense—that they should be tried
as the law provides; that if they were guilty they should be
convicted; that they should be given the same fair treatment
as any other person. There was no prejudice against them
because they were accused of crime.” “You mean,” Shultz
slyly said, “you saw no reason for the court on its own
motion to grant a change of venue?” Tate’s lips curved
downward, his eyes blazed. “Mr. Shultz,” he said, as though
the name was a prolonged hiss, “the court cannot on its
own grant a change of venue. That would be contrary to
Kansas law. Icouldn’t grant a change unless it was properly
requested.”
But why had such a request not been made by the
defendants’ attorneys? Shultz now pursued this question
with the attorneys themselves, for to discredit them and
prove that they had not supplied their clients with the
minimum protection was, from the Wichita lawyer’s
viewpoint, the hearing’s principal objective. Fleming and
Smith withstood the onslaught in good style, particularly
Fleming, who, wearing a bold red tie and an abiding smile,
endured Shultz with gentlemanly resignation. Explaining
why he had not applied for a change of venue, he said, “I
felt that since the Reverend Cowan, the minister of the
Methodist church, and a man of substance here, a man of
high standing, as well as many other ministers here, had
expressed themselves against capital punishment, that at
least the leaven had been cast in the area, and there were
likely more people here inclined to be lenient in the matter
of the penalty than perhaps in other parts of the state. Then I
believe it was a brother of Mrs. Clutter’s who made a
statement that appeared in the press indicating he did not
feel the defendants should be put to death.”
Shultz had a score of charges, but underlying them all was
the implication that because of community pressure,
Fleming and Smith had deliberately neglected their duties.
Both men, Shultz maintained, had betrayed their clients by
not consulting with them sufficiently (Mr. Fleming replied, “I
worked on the case to the very best of my ability, giving it
more time than Ido most cases”); by waiving a preliminary
hearing (Smith answered, “But sir, neither Mr. Fleming nor I
had been appointed counsel at the time of the waiver”); by
making remarks to newsmen damaging to the defendants
(Shultz to Smith: “Are you aware that a reporter, Ron Kull of
the Topeka Daily Capital, quoted you, on the second day
of the trial, as saying there was no doubt of Mr. Hickock’s
guilt, but that you were concerned only with obtaining life
imprisonment rather than the death penalty?” Smith to
Shultz: “No, sir. If Iwas quoted as saying that it was
incorrect”); and by failing to prepare a proper defense.
This last proposition was the one Shultz pedaled hardest; it
is relevant, therefore, to reproduce an opinion of it written
by three Federal judges as the result of a subsequent
appeal to the United States Court of Appeals, Tenth Circuit:
“We think, however, that those viewing the situation in
retrospect have lost sight of the problems which confronted
Attorneys Smith and Fleming when they undertook the
defense of these petitioners. When they accepted the
appointments each petitioner had made a full confession,
and they did not then contend, nor did they seriously
contend at any time in the state courts, that these
confessions were not voluntary. A radio taken from the
Clutter home and sold by the petitioners in Mexico City had
been recovered, and the attorneys knew of other evidence
of their guilt then in the possession of the prosecution.
When called upon to plead to the charges against them
they stood mute, and it was necessary for the court to enter
a plea of not guilty for them. There was no substantial
evidence then, and none has been produced since the trial,
to substantiate a defense of insanity. The attempt to
establish insanity as a defense because of serious injuries
in accidents years before, and headaches and occasional
fainting spells of Hickock, was like grasping at the
proverbial straw. The attorneys were faced with a situation
where outrageous crimes committed on innocent persons
had been admitted. Under these circumstances, they would
have been justified in advising that petitioners enter pleas
of guilty and throw themselves on the mercy of the court.
Their only hope was through some turn of fate the lives of
these misguided individuals might be spared.”
In the report he submitted to the Kansas Supreme Court,
Judge Thiele found that the petitioners had received a
constitutionally fair trial; the court thereupon denied the writ
to abolish the verdict, and set a new date of execution—
October 25, 1962. As it happened, Lowell Lee Andrews,
whose case had twice traveled all the way to the United
States Supreme Court, was scheduled to hang one month
later.
The Clutter slayers, granted a reprieve by a Federal judge,
evaded their date. Andrews kept his.
In the disposition of capital cases in the United States, the
median elapsed time between sentence and execution is
approximately seventeen months. Recently, in Texas, an
armed robber was electrocuted one month after his
conviction; but in Louisiana, at the present writing, two
rapists have been waiting for a record twelve years. The
variance depends a little on luck and a great deal on the
extent of litigation. The majority of the lawyers handling
these cases are court-appointed and work without
recompense; but more often than not the courts, in order to
avoid future appeals based on complaints of inadequate
representation, appoint men of first quality who defend with
commendable vigor. However, even an attorney of
moderate talent can postpone doomsday year after year,
for the system of appeals that pervades American
jurisprudence amounts to a legalistic wheel of fortune, a
game of chance, somewhat fixed in the favor of the
criminal, that the participants play interminably, first in the
state courts, then through the Federal courts until the
ultimate tribunal is reached—the United States Supreme
Court. But even defeat there does not signify if petitioner’s
counsel can discover or invent new grounds for appeal;
usually they can, and so once more the wheel turns, and
turns until, perhaps some years later, the prisoner arrives
back at the nation’s highest court, probably only to begin
again the slow cruel contest. But at intervals the wheel does
pause to declare a winner—or, though with increasing
rarity, a loser: Andrews’ lawyers fought to the final moment,
but their client went to the gallows on Friday, November 30,
1962.
“That was a cold night,” Hickock said, talking to a journalist
with whom he corresponded and who was periodically
allowed to visit him. “Cold and wet. It had been raining like
a bastard, and the baseball field was mud up to your
cojones. So when they took Andy out to the warehouse,
they had to walk him along the path. We were all at our
windows watching—Perry and me, Ronnie York, Jimmy
Latham. It was just after midnight, and the warehouse was
lit up like a Halloween pumpkin. The doors wide open. We
could see the witnesses, a lot of guards, the doctor and the
warden—every damn thing but the gallows. It was off at an
angle, but we could see its shadow. A shadow on the wall
like the shadow of a boxing ring.
“The chaplain and four guards had charge of Andy, and
when they got to the door they stopped a second. Andy was
looking at the gallows—you could sense he was. His arms
were tied in front of him. All of a sudden the chaplain
reached out and took off Andy’s glasses. Which was kind
of pitiful, Andy without his glasses. They led him on inside,
and Iwondered he could see to climb the steps. It was real
quiet, just nothing but this dog barking way off. Some town
dog. Then we heard it, the sound, and Jimmy Latham said,
“What was that?”; and Itold him what it was—the trap door.
“Then it was real quiet again. Except that dog. Old Andy, he
danced a long time. They must have had a real mess to
clean up. Every few minutes the doctor came to the door
and stepped outside, and stood there with this stethoscope
in his hand. Iwouldn’t say he was enjoying his work—kept
gasping, like he was gasping for breath, and he was crying,
too. Jimmy said, ‘Get a load of that nance.’ Iguess the
reason he stepped outside was so the others wouldn’t see
he was crying. Then he’d go back and listen to hear if
Andy’s heart had stopped. Seemed like it never would. The
fact is, his heart kept beating for nineteen minutes.
“Andy was a funny kid,” Hickock said, smiling lopsidedly as
he propped a cigarette between his lips. “It was like Itold
him: he had no respect for human life, not even his own.
Right before they hanged him, he sat down and ate two
fried chickens. And that last afternoon he was smoking
cigars and drinking Coke and writing poetry. When they
came to get him, and we said our goodbye, Isaid, ‘I’ll be
seeing you soon, Andy. ’Cause I’m sure we’re going to the
same place. So scout around and see if you can’t find a
cool shady spot for us Down There.’ He laughed, and said
he didn’t believe in heaven or hell, just dust unto dust. And
he said an aunt and uncle had been to see him, and told
him they had a coffin waiting to carry him to some little
cemetery in north Missouri. The same place where the
three he disposed of were buried. They planned to put
Andy right alongside them. He said when they told him that
he could hardly keep a straight face. Isaid, ‘Well, you’re
lucky to have a grave. Most likely they’ll give Perry and me
to the vivisectionist.’ We joked on like that till it was time to
go, and just as he was going he handed me a piece of
paper with a poem on it. Idon’t know if he wrote it. Or
copied it out of a book. My impression was he wrote it. If
you’re interested, I’ll send it to you.”
He later did so, and Andrews’ farewell message turned out
to be the ninth stanza of Gray’s “Elegy Written in a Country
Churchyard”:
The boasts of heraldry, the pomp of pow’r,
And all that beauty, all that wealth e’er gave,
Await alike the inevitable hour:
The paths of glory lead but to the grave.
“Ireally liked Andy. He was a nut—not a real nut, like they
kept hollering; but, you know, just goofy. He was always
talking about breaking out of here and making his living as
a hired gun. He liked to imagine himself roaming around
Chicago or Los Angeles with a machine gun inside a violin
case. Cooling guys. Said he’d charge a thousand bucks
per stiff.”
Hickock laughed, presumably at the absurdity of his friend’s
ambitions, sighed, and shook his head. “But for someone
his age he was the smartest person Iever come across. A
human library. When that boy read a book it stayed read.
Course he didn’t know a dumb-darn thing about life. Me,
I’m an ignoramus except when it comes to what Iknow
about life. I’ve walked along a lot of mean streets. I’ve seen
a white man flogged. I’ve watched babies born. I’ve seen a
girl, and her no more than fourteen, take on three guys at
the same time and give them all their money’s worth. Fell
off a ship once five miles out to sea. Swam five miles with
my life passing before me with every stroke. Once Ishook
hands with President Truman in the lobby of the Hotel
Muehlebach. Harry S Truman. When Iwas working for the
hospital, driving an ambulance, Isaw every side of life there
is—things that would make a dog vomit. But Andy. He
didn’t know one dumb-damn-darn thing except what he’d
read in books.
“He was innocent as a little child, some kid with a box of
Cracker Jack. He’d never once been with a woman. Man or
mule. He said so himself. Maybe that’s what Iliked about
him most. How he wouldn’t prevaricate. The rest of us on
the Row, we’re all a bunch of bull-artists. I’m one of the
worst. Shoot, you’ve got to talk about something. Brag.
Otherwise you’re nobody, nothing, a potato vegetating in
your seven-by-ten limbo. But Andy never would partake. He
said what’s the use telling a lot of stuff that never happened.
“Old Perry, though, he wasn’t sorry to see the last of Andy.
Andy was the one thing in the world Perry wants to be—
educated. And Perry couldn’t forgive him for it. You know
how Perry’s always using hundred-dollar words he doesn’t
half know the meaning of? Sounds like one of them college
niggers? Boy, it burned his bottom to have Andy catch up
on him and haul him to the curb. Course Andy was just
trying to give him what he wanted—an education. The truth
is, can’t anybody get along with Perry. He hasn’t got a
single friend on the premises. Imean, just who the hell does
he think he is? Sneering at everybody. Calling people
perverts and degenerates. Going on about what low I.Q.’s
they have. It’s too bad we can’t all be such sensitive souls
like little Perry. Saints. Boy, but Iknow some hardrocks
who’d gladly go to The Corner if they could get him alone in
the shower room for just one hot minute. The way he high-
hats York and Latham! Ronnie says he sure wishes he
knew where he could lay hold of a bullwhip. Says he’d like
to squeeze Perry a little. Idon’t blame him. After all, we’re
all in the same fix, and they’re pretty good boys.”
Hickock chuckled ruefully, shrugged, and said, “You know
what Imean. Good—considering. Ronnie York’s mother
has been here to visit him several times. One day, out in the
waiting room, she met my mother, and now they’ve come to
be each other’s number-one buddy. Mrs. York wants my
mother to come visit her home in Florida, maybe even live
there. Jesus, Iwish she would. Then she wouldn’t have to
go through this ordeal. Once a month riding the bus here to
see me. Smiling, trying to find something to say, make me
feel good. The poor lady. Idon’t know how she stands it. I
wonder she isn’t crazy.”
Hickock’s uneven eyes turned toward a window in the
visiting room; his face, puffy, pallid as a funeral lily,
gleamed in the weak winter sunshine filtering through the
bar-shrouded glass.
“The poor lady. She wrote the warden, and asked him if she
could speak to Perry the next time she came here. She
wanted to hear from Perry himself how he killed those
people, how Inever fired shot one. All Ican hope is that
some day we’ll get a new trial, and Perry will testify and tell
the truth. Only Idoubt it. He’s plain determined that if he
goes Igo. Back to back. It’s not right. Many a man has
killed and never seen the inside of a death cell. And Inever
killed anybody. If you’ve got fifty thousand dollars to spend,
you could bump off half of Kansas City and just laugh ha
ha.” A sudden grin obliterated his woeful indignation. “Uh-
oh. There Igo again. Old crybaby. You’d think I’d learn. But
honest to God, I’ve done my damnedest to get along with
Perry. Only he’s so critical. Two-faced. So jealous of every
little thing. Every letter Iget, every visit. Nobody ever comes
to see him except you,” he said, nodding at the journalist,
who was as equally well acquainted with Smith as he was
with Hickock. “Or his lawyer. Remember when he was in
the hospital? With that phony starvation routine? And his
dad sent the postcard? Well, the warden wrote Perry’s dad
and said he was welcome to come here any time. But he
never has showed up. Idon’t know. Sometimes you got to
feel sorry for Perry. He must be one of the most alone
people there ever was. But. Aw, the hell with him. It’s mostly
every bit his own fault.”
Hickock slipped another cigarette away from a package of
Pall Malls, wrinkled his nose, and said, “I’ve tried to quit
smoking. Then Ifigure what difference does it make under
the circumstances. With a little luck, maybe I’ll get cancer
and beat the state at its own game. For a while there Iwas
smoking cigars. Andy’s. The morning after they hanged
him, Iwoke up and called to him, ‘Andy?’—the way Iusually
did. Then Iremembered he was on his way to Missouri.
With the aunt and uncle. Ilooked out in the corridor. His cell
had been cleaned out, and all his junk was piled there. The
mattress off his bunk, his slippers, and the scrapbook with
all the food pictures—he called it his icebox. And this box of
‘Macbeth’ cigars. Itold the guard Andy wanted me to have
them, left them to me in his will. Actually, Inever smoked
them all. Maybe it was the idea of Andy, but somehow they
gave me indigestion.
“Well, what’s there to say about capital punishment? I’m not
against it. Revenge is all it is, but what’s wrong with
revenge? It’s very important. If Iwas kin to the Clutters, or
any of the parties York and Latham dispensed with, I
couldn’t rest in peace till the ones responsible had taken
that ride on the Big Swing. These people that write letters
to the newspapers. There were two in a Topeka paper the
other day—one from a minister. Saying, in effect, what is all
this legal farce, why haven’t those sonsabitches Smith and
Hickock got it in the neck, how come those murdering
sonsabitches are still eating up the taxpayers’ money?
Well, Ican see their side. They’re mad ’cause they’re not
getting what they want—revenge. And they’re not going to
get it if Ican help it. Ibelieve in hanging. Just so long as I’m
not the one being hanged.”
But then he was.
Another three years passed, and during those years two
exceptionally skillful Kansas City lawyers, Joseph P.
Jenkins and Robert Bingham, replaced Shultz, the latter
having resigned from the case. Appointed by a Federal
judge, and working without compensation (but motivated by
a hard-held opinion that the defendants had been the
victims of a “nightmarishly unfair trial”), Jenkins and
Bingham filed numerous appeals within the framework of
the Federal court system, thereby avoiding three execution
dates: October 25, 1962, August 8, 1963, and February 18,
1965. The attorneys contended that their clients had been
unjustly convicted because legal counsel had not been
appointed them until after they had confessed and had
waived preliminary hearings; and because they were not
competently represented at their trial, were convicted with
the help of evidence seized without a search warrant (the
shotgun and knife taken from the Hickock home), were not
granted a change of venue even though the environs of the
trial had been “saturated” with publicity prejudicial to the
accused.
With these arguments, Jenkins and Bingham succeeded in
carrying the case three times to the United States Supreme
Court—the Big Boy, as many litigating prisoners refer to it
—but on each occasion the Court, which never comments
on its decisions in such instances, denied the appeals by
refusing to grant the writs of certiorari that would have
entitled the appellants to a full hearing before the Court. In
March, 1965, after Smith and Hickock had been confined in
their Death Row cells almost two thousand days, the
Kansas Supreme Court decreed that their lives must end
between midnight and 2:00 A.M., Wednesday, April 14,
1965. Subsequently, a clemency appeal was presented to
the newly elected Governor of Kansas, William Avery; but
Avery, a rich farmer sensitive to public opinion, refused to
intervene—a decision he felt to be in the “best interest of
the people of Kansas.” (Two months later, Avery also
denied the clemency appeals of York and Latham, who
were hanged on June 22, 1965.)
And so it happened that in the daylight hours of that
Wednesday morning, Alvin Dewey, breakfasting in the
coffee shop of a Topeka hotel, read, on the first page of the
Kansas City Star, a headline he had long awaited: DIE ON
ROPE FOR BLOODY CRIME. The story, written by an Associated
Press reporter, began: “Richard Eugene Hickock and Perry
Edward Smith, partners in crime, died on the gallows at the
state prison early today for one of the bloodiest murders in
Kansas criminal annals. Hickock, 33 years old, died first, at
12:41 A.M.; Smith, 36, died at 1:19. . .”
Dewey had watched them die, for he had been among the
twenty-odd witnesses invited to the ceremony. He had
never attended an execution, and when on the midnight
past he entered the cold warehouse, the scenery had
surprised him: he had anticipated a setting of suitable
dignity, not this bleakly lighted cavern cluttered with lumber
and other debris. But the gallows itself, with its two pale
nooses attached to a crossbeam, was imposing enough;
and so, in an unexpected style, was the hangman, who cast
a long shadow from his perch on the platform at the top of
the wooden instrument’s thirteen steps. The hangman, an
anonymous, leathery gentleman who had been imported
from Missouri for the event, for which he was paid six
hundred dollars, was attired in an aged double-breasted
pin-striped suit overly commodious for the narrow figure
inside it—the coat came nearly to his knees; and on his
head he wore a cowboy hat which, when first bought, had
perhaps been bright green, but was now a weathered,
sweat-stained oddity.
Also, Dewey found the self-consciously casual conversation
of his fellow witnesses, as they stood awaiting the start of
what one witness termed “the festivities,” disconcerting.
“What Iheard was, they was gonna let them draw straws to
see who dropped first. Or flip a coin. But Smith says why
not do it alphabetically. Guess ’cause S comes after H.
Ha!”
“Read in the paper, afternoon paper, what they ordered for
their last meal? Ordered the same menu. Shrimp. French
fries. Garlic bread. Ice cream and strawberries and
whipped cream. Understand Smith didn’t touch his much.”
“That Hickock’s got a sense of humor. They was telling me
how, about an hour ago, one of the guards says to him,
‘This must be the longest night of your life.’ And Hickock, he
laughs and says, ‘No. The shortest.’ ”
“Did you hear about Hickock’s eyes? He left them to an eye
doctor. Soon as they cut him down, this doctor’s gonna
yank out his eyes and stick them in somebody else’s head.
Can’t say I’d want to be that somebody. I’d feel peculiar
with them eyes in my head.”
“Christ! Is that rain? All the windows down! My new Chevy.
Christ!”
The sudden rain rapped the high warehouse roof. The
sound, not unlike the rat-a-tat-tat of parade drums, heralded
Hickock’s arrival. Accompanied by six guards and a
prayer-murmuring chaplain, he entered the death place
handcuffed and wearing an ugly harness of leather straps
that bound his arms to his torso. At the foot of the gallows
the warden read to him the official order of execution, a
two-page document; and as the warden read, Hickock’s
eyes, enfeebled by half a decade of cell shadows, roamed
the little audience until, not seeing what he sought, he
asked the nearest guard, in a whisper, if any member of the
Clutter family was present. When he was told no, the
prisoner seemed disappointed, as though he thought the
protocol surrounding this ritual of vengeance was not being
properly observed.
As is customary, the warden, having finished his recitation,
asked the condemned man whether he had any last
statement to make. Hickock nodded. “Ijust want to say I
hold no hard feelings. You people are sending me to a
better world than this ever was”; then, as if to emphasize
the point, he shook hands with the four men mainly
responsible for his capture and conviction, all of whom had
requested permission to attend the executions: K.B.I.
Agents Roy Church, Clarence Duntz, Harold Nye, and
Dewey himself. “Nice to see you,” Hickock said with his
most charming smile; it was as if he were greeting guests
at his own funeral.
The hangman coughed—impatiently lifted his cowboy hat
and settled it again, a gesture somehow reminiscent of a
turkey buzzard huffing, then smoothing its neck feathers—
and Hickock, nudged by an attendant, mounted the scaffold
steps. “The Lord giveth, the Lord taketh away. Blessed is
the name of the Lord,” the chaplain intoned, as the rain
sound accelerated, as the noose was fitted, and as a
delicate black mask was tied round the prisoner’s eyes.
“May the Lord have mercy on your soul.” The trap door
opened, and Hickock hung for all to see a full twenty
minutes before the prison doctor at last said, “Ipronounce
this man dead.” A hearse, its blazing headlights beaded
with rain, drove into the warehouse, and the body, placed
on a litter and shrouded under a blanket, was carried to the
hearse and out into the night.
Staring after it, Roy Church shook his head: “Inever would
have believed he had the guts. To take it like he did. Ihad
him tagged a coward.”
The man to whom he spoke, another detective, said, “Aw,
Roy. The guy was a punk. A mean bastard. He deserved it.”
Church, with thoughtful eyes, continued to shake his head.
While waiting for the second execution, a reporter and a
guard conversed. The reporter said, “This your first
hanging?”
“Iseen Lee Andrews.”
“This here’s my first.”
“Yeah. How’d you like it?”
The reporter pursed his lips. “Nobody in our office wanted
the assignment. Me either. But it wasn’t as bad as Ithought
it would be. Just like jumping off a diving board. Only with a
rope around your neck.”
“They don’t feel nothing. Drop, snap, and that’s it. They
don’t feel nothing.”
“Are you sure? Iwas standing right close. Icould hear him
gasping for breath.”
“Uh-huh, but he don’t feel nothing. Wouldn’t be humane if he
did.”
“Well. And Isuppose they feed them a lot of pills.
Sedatives.”
“Hell, no. Against the rules. Here comes Smith.”
“Gosh, Ididn’t know he was such a shrimp.”
“Yeah, he’s little. But so is a tarantula.”
As he was brought into the warehouse, Smith recognized
his old foe, Dewey; he stopped chewing a hunk of
Doublemint gum he had in his mouth, and grinned and
winked at Dewey, jaunty and mischievous. But after the
warden asked if he had anything to say, his expression was
sober. His sensitive eyes gazed gravely at the surrounding
faces, swerved up to the shadowy hangman, then
downward to his own manacled hands. He looked at his
fingers, which were stained with ink and paint, for he’d
spent his final three years on Death Row painting self-
portraits and pictures of children, usually the children of
inmates who supplied him with photographs of their
seldom-seen progeny. “Ithink,” he said, “it’s a helluva thing
to take a life in this manner. Idon’t believe in capital
punishment, morally or legally. Maybe Ihad something to
contribute, something—” His assurance faltered; shyness
blurred his voice, lowered it to a just audible level. “It would
be meaningless to apologize for what Idid. Even
inappropriate. But Ido. Iapologize.”
Steps, noose, mask; but before the mask was adjusted, the
prisoner spat his chewing gum into the chaplain’s
outstretched palm. Dewey shut his eyes; he kept them shut
until he heard the thud-snap that announces a rope-broken
neck. Like the majority of American law-enforcement
officials, Dewey is certain that capital punishment is a
deterrent to violent crime, and he felt that if ever the penalty
had been earned, the present instance was it. The
preceding execution had not disturbed him, he had never
had much use for Hickock, who seemed to him “a small-
time chiseler who got out of his depth, empty and
worthless.” But Smith, though he was the true murderer,
aroused another response, for Perry possessed a quality,
the aura of an exiled animal, a creature walking wounded,
that the detective could not disregard. He remembered his
first meeting with Perry in the interrogation room at Police
Headquarters in Las Vegas—the dwarfish boy-man seated
in the metal chair, his small booted feet not quite brushing
the floor. And when Dewey now opened his eyes, that is
what he saw: the same childish feet, tilted, dangling.
Dewey had imagined that with the deaths of Smith and
Hickock, he would experience a sense of climax, release,
of a design justly completed. Instead, he discovered himself
recalling an incident of almost a year ago, a casual
encounter in Valley View Cemetery, which, in retrospect,
had somehow for him more or less ended the Clutter case.
The pioneers who founded Garden City were necessarily a
Spartan people, but when the time came to establish a
formal cemetery, they were determined, despite arid soil
and the troubles of transporting water, to create a rich
contrast to the dusty streets, the austere plains. The result,
which they named Valley View, is situated above the town
on a plateau of modest altitude. Seen today, it is a dark
island lapped by the undulating surf of surrounding wheat
fields—a good refuge from a hot day, for there are many
cool paths unbrokenly shaded by trees planted generations
ago.
One afternoon the previous May, a month when the fields
blaze with the green-gold fire of half-grown wheat, Dewey
had spent several hours at Valley View weeding his father’s
grave, an obligation he had too long neglected. Dewey was
fifty-one, four years older than when he had supervised the
Clutter investigation; but he was still lean and agile, and still
the K.B.I.’s principal agent in western Kansas; only a week
earlier he had caught a pair of cattle rustlers. The dream of
settling on his farm had not come true, for his wife’s fear of
living in that sort of isolation had never lessened. Instead,
the Deweys had built a new house in town; they were proud
of it, and proud, too, of both their sons, who were deep-
voiced now and as tall as their father. The older boy was
headed for college in the autumn.
When he had finished weeding, Dewey strolled along the
quiet paths. He stopped at a tombstone marked with a
recently carved name: Tate. Judge Tate had died of
pneumonia the past November; wreaths, brown roses, and
rain-faded ribbons still lay upon the raw earth. Close by,
fresher petals spilled across a newer mound—the grave of
Bonnie Jean Ashida, the Ashidas’ elder daughter, who
while visiting Garden City had been killed in a car collision.
Deaths, births, marriages—why, just the other day he’d
heard that Nancy Clutter’s boy friend, young Bobby Rupp,
had gone and got married.
The graves of the Clutter family, four graves gathered under
a single gray stone, lie in a far corner of the cemetery—
beyond the trees, out in the sun, almost at the wheat field’s
bright edge. As Dewey approached them, he saw that
another visitor was already there: a willowy girl with white-
gloved hands, a smooth cap of dark-honey hair, and long,
elegant legs. She smiled at him, and he wondered who she
was.
“Have you forgotten me, Mr. Dewey? Susan Kidwell.”
He laughed; she joined him. “Sue Kidwell. I’ll be darned.”
He hadn’t seen her since the trial; she had been a child
then. “How are you? How’s your mother?”
“Fine, thank you. She’s still teaching music at the Holcomb
School.”
“Haven’t been that way lately. Any changes?”
“Oh, there’s some talk about paving the streets. But you
know Holcomb. Actually, Idon’t spend much time there.
This is my junior year at K.U.,” she said, meaning the
University of Kansas. “I’m just home for a few days.”
“That’s wonderful, Sue. What are you studying?”
“Everything. Art, mostly. Ilove it. I’m really happy.” She
glanced across the prairie. “Nancy and Iplanned to go to
college together. We were going to be roommates. Ithink
about it sometimes. Suddenly, when I’m very happy, Ithink
of all the plans we made.”
Dewey looked at the gray stone inscribed with four names,
and the date of their death: November 15, 1959. “Do you
come here often?”
“Once in a while. Gosh, the sun’s strong.” She covered her
eyes with tinted glasses. “Remember Bobby Rupp? He
married a beautiful girl.”
“So Iheard.”
“Colleen Whitehurst. She’s really beautiful. And very nice,
too.”
“Good for Bobby.” And to tease her, Dewey added, “But
how about you? You must have a lot of beaus.”
“Well. Nothing serious. But that reminds me. Do you have
the time? Oh,” she cried, when he told her it was past four,
“I’ve got to run! But it was nice to have seen you, Mr.
Dewey.”
“And nice to have seen you, Sue. Good luck,” he called
after her as she disappeared down the path, a pretty girl in
a hurry, her smooth hair swinging, shining—just such a
young woman as Nancy might have been. Then, starting
home, he walked toward the trees, and under them, leaving
behind him the big sky, the whisper of wind voices in the
wind-bent wheat.
THE END
